---
layout: post
title: "Alcohol"
date: 2017-01-06
category: active
tags: biochemistry health
abstract: >
  Alcohol is a common psychoactive drug, and while the initial ingestion can be liberating, the recovery period can be staggering. This page is a collection of notes on developing a hangover cure in conjunction with the work in progress on [endyourhangover.com][].
---

# Goal
To abolish the toxic, unwanted effects of alcohol commonly known as a hangover by administration of commonly available dietary supplements without affecting greater damage in the long term.

## Secondary-Goals
* Minimize the effort required to avert a hangover
* Keep the wanted effects of alcohol intact
* Focus on short term, acute effects
* Maximize subsequent exercise performance
* Avoid xenobiotic alterations to physiology

# Current Formula

* glucose + glucose polymer
* saline + basic electrolyte solution
* glutamine (or complex protein)
* Creatine
* zinc
* N-acetylcysteine
* Alpha-Lipoic Acid
* Acetyl-L-carnitine
* Agmatine
* Ornithine
* Trimethylglycine
* Taurine
* Supplemental antioxidants: Vit E, C
* Magnesium

# Version 0.1
Designed for a weekend trip of drinking and running followed by a Tough Mudder.

* 221g Electro-Endurance
* 468.17g base mix
  * creatine
  * ornithine
  * ALA
  * ALCAR
  * TMG
  * taurine
  * glutamine
  * Agmatine
  * NAC
* + 10 (50mg Zn) pills - 6.80g
* = 474.97g
* 47.5g each dose
* 23.75 each half dose

# Ethanol Pharmacokinetics
The major gender difference was found after oral administration; although there were no gender differences in the peak alcohol levels (25.3 +- 1.3 mg/dl in women vs. 25.6 +- 2.1, in men), high ethanol levels persisted longer in women than in men. [^BaraonaGenderDifferencesPharmacokinetics2001]

**Several genetic variants exist which modify ethanol and acetaldehyde metabolism, but will not be discussed here. See** [^wall_biology_2016]

## Absorption
By contrast, the AUC after intravenous administration were similar in both genders (58.4 +- 3.3 vs. 53.7 +- 3.3). [^BaraonaGenderDifferencesPharmacokinetics2001]
Twenty percent of ethanol is absorbed in the stomach and 80% in the upper small intestine. [^j_dinis-oliveira_oxidative_2016]
In general, there is little difference in the rate of absorption of the same dose of alcohol administered in the form of different alcoholic beverage i.e., blood ethanol concentration is not significantly influenced by the type of alcoholic beverage consumed. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
The rate of alcohol absorption depends on the rate of gastric emptying, the concentration of alcohol and is more rapid in the fasted state. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
The blood alcohol concentration is determined by the amount of alcohol consumed,the presence or absence of food and the rate of alcohol metabolism. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Solid food intake can reduce the ethanol absorption rate by 30% and it has been suggested that this effect is due to the need for food digestion prior to absorption process. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
As such, if food is taken in as a liquid then it would not produce this effect [49, 54]. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
In both genders, the rate of gastric emptying decreases and the FPM increases by raising the imbibed ethanol concentration (Roine et al., 1991), but there is no evidence that this inhibitory effect of ethanol concentration is greater in male than in female subjects. [^BaraonaGenderDifferencesPharmacokinetics2001]

## Distribution

In the present study, the volume of alcohol distribution in women was 7.3% lower than in men, a difference too small to account for the changes in alcohol levels. [^BaraonaGenderDifferencesPharmacokinetics2001]
The equilibrium concentration of alcohol in a tissue depends on the relative water content of that tissue. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
The distribution of ethanol throughout the body is driven in direct proportion to water content of each tissue, especially at the ethanol steady-state. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
Since the blood flow to the brain remains relatively constant, changes in the blood concentration of ethanol are the most relevant factor influencing the amount of ethanol delivered to the brain and therefore for the different levels of brain intoxication [78–80]. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]



## Metabolism
Ninety percent of ethanol is metabolized in the liver after multiple passages but the lungs (especially via CYP2E1) also contribute to metabolism. [^j_dinis-oliveira_oxidative_2016]
In the gastric mucosa (and not in the small intestine), 5-10% of ethanol is metabolized by alcohol dehydrogenase isoform (or isozyme) 7 (ADH7) and this is called gastric first pass metabolism of ethanol [3, 4]. [^j_dinis-oliveira_oxidative_2016]
The Km of CYP2E1 for ethanol is 10 mM, which is roughly one order of magnitude higher than that of ADH1. [^j_dinis-oliveira_oxidative_2016]
Therefore, CYP2E1 and catalase are the main pathways in the brain that metabolize ethanol to acetaldehyde, while ADH appears to play a minor role. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
The oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde can occur in the brain through pathways that involve catalase, cytochrome CYP2E1, and ADH. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
First pass metabolism of alcohol occurs in the stomach and is decreased in alcoholics. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Alcohol metabolism is regulated by the nutritional state, the concentration of alcohol,specific isoforms of alcohol dehyrogenase, need to remove acetaldehyde and regenerate NAD and induction of CYP2E1. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Whereas metabolism of the major nutrients is under hormonal control, e.g insulin/glucagon, leptin, catecholamine, thyroid hormones, generally, there is little hormonal regulation to pace the rate of alcohol elimination. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Animals with small body weight metabolize alcohol at faster rates than larger animals e.g. the rate of alcohol elimination in mice is 5 times greater than the rate in humans. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
However, it is important to note that alcohol-derived calories are produced at the expense of the metabolism of normal nutrients since alcohol will be oxidized preferentially over other nutrients (19–23). [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
The Km of CYP2E1 for alcohol is 10 mM ,10-fold higher than the Km of ADH for ethanol but still within the range of alcohol concentrations seen in social drinking. At low alcohol concentrations, CYP2E1 may account for about 10% of the total alcohol oxidizing capacity of the liver. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Acetaldehyde can also be oxidized by aldehyde oxidase, xanthine oxidase, and by CYP2E1, but these are insignificant pathways. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
The overall significance of first pass metabolism by the stomach is controversial. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
MEOS has a higher Km than ADH in oxidizing alcohol and oxidizes alcohol to generate acetaldehyde. [^leung_cyp2e1_2013]
Consequently ADH3 plays a more important role in the metabolism of alcohol at high concentrations. In addition, microsomal ethanol oxidizing system (MEOS) and catalase contribute to the metabolism of alcohol in specific circumstances, such as high ethanol concentrations [48, 60]. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]

### ADH
Nonetheless, ADH4 inhibition avoids the synaptic dysfunction associated with severe alcohol intoxication in the hippocampus [89]. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
Liver alcohol dehydrogenase is the major enzyme system for metabolizing alcohol; this requires the cofactor NAD and the products produced are acetaldehyde and NADH. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
There is, however, no correlation between the alcohol dehydrogenase activity measured in vitro and the rate of ethanol oxidation in vivo or in liver slices [2,3,4]. As the activity of the enzyme does not appear to be the rate-limiting factor, it is assumed that the oxidation of NADH is rate- limiting for the ethanol oxidation in vivo. [^thieden_effect_1972]
Moreover, a small amount of ethanol can be oxidized to acetaldehyde by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) classes I and IV [52, 55] in the stomach and intestine. This acetaldehyde can be absorbed along with ethanol and metabolized by the liver or other tissues. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
Most first pass metabolism occurs in the liver [49, 55] and the rate-limiting step is the oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde. This reaction is catalyzed by proteins of the ADH family [56], of which class I (ADH1) and III (ADH3) enzymes metabolize ethanol in the liver [57, 58]. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
Indeed, ethanol is primarily bioactivated (92-95%) by cytosolic (especially hepatic) ADH1B into acetaldehyde, which has proved to have mutagen and carcinogen effects [1]. [^j_dinis-oliveira_oxidative_2016]
The gastric mucosa expresses three classes of ADH isozymes in a decreasing order of affinity for ethanol: gamma-ADH, a class I isozyme also present in the liver, sigma-ADH, a class IV ADH characteristic of the upper digestive tract, and chi-ADH, a class III isozyme found in most tissues. we found a 58% reduction in class III (or chi -) ADH activity in women compared with men (Fig. 3), [^BaraonaGenderDifferencesPharmacokinetics2001]

### ALDH
The acetaldehyde is further oxidized to acetate, the same final metabolite produced from all other nutrients-carbohydrates, fats and proteins; the acetate can be converted to CO2, fatty acids, ketone bodies, cholesterol and steroids. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
The low Km mitochondrial ALDH oxidizes most of the acetaldehyde produced from the oxidation of alcohol, although in human liver, the class I cytosolic ALDH may also contribute (75). [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
In general, the capacity of ALDH to remove acetaldehyde exceeds the capacity of acetaldehyde generation by the various pathways of alcohol oxidation. Therefore, circulating levels of acetaldehyde are usually very low. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
The acetaldehyde produced by the oxidation of ethanol is thereafter transformed to acetate by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) [61], which can be further metabolized through the tricarboxylic acid cycle to generate energy, or these metabolites can be deposited in the plasma [62, 63]. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]

### CYP2E1
Oxidation of alcohol by cytochrome P450 pathways, especially CYP2E1 which is induced by alcohol, are secondary pathways to remove alcohol especially at high concentrations. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Among the cytochrome P450 family, CYP2E1 has been identified as the most relevant for ALD as it is highly inducible and it has high catalytic activity for alcohol [18]. [^leung_cyp2e1_2013]
CYP2E1 is mainly expressed in the liver, with hepatocytes showing the highest expression, but it is also located in other organs such as the brain and intestine. CYP2E1 is mainly located within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) although it is also expressed in the mitochondria [23]. [^leung_cyp2e1_2013]
This indicates that CYP4A induction could be an alternative pathway when CYP2E1 is less available [28]. [^leung_cyp2e1_2013]
[CYP2E1] enzyme is induced in response to chronic drinking and it may contribute to the increased rates of ethanol elimination in heavy drinkers. Some endogenous substrates for CYP2E1 include acetone and fatty acids, both of which are abundant in the brain [95]. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
At high blood ethanol levels, the microsomal ethanol-oxidizing system (CYP2E1 isoform, located in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum) also has an important role. Ethanol itself induces the activity of CYP2E1, and therefore also influences the metabolism of other xenobiotics ( e.g. paracetemol and cocaine) [^j_dinis-oliveira_oxidative_2016]

### Catalase
Studies using inhibitors of catalase and acatalasemic mice revealed that catalase is responsible for approximately half of the ethanol metabolism occurring in the CNS [91]. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
[Catalase] pathway is limited by the rather low rates of H2O2 generation produced under physiological cellular conditions (less than 4 umol/g liver/hr, only 2% that of alcohol oxidation) and appears to have an insignificant role in alcohol oxidation by the liver. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Indeed, acetaldehyde production in the brain in vivo depends on catalase activity [85, 93] and catalase appears to be expressed in all neural cells. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
Catalase is of minor importance (responsible for approximately 5%) in the metabolism of ethanol. [^j_dinis-oliveira_oxidative_2016]


## Elimination
Alcohol elimination now follows Michaelis-Menten kinetics; the rate of change in the concentration of alcohol depends on the concentration of alcohol and the kinetic constants Km and Vmax (23,24). [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Unchanged ethanol is eliminated in small quantities (approximately 5% of orally absorbed ethanol) by the kidneys (0.5–2%), lungs (1.6–6%) and skin (<0.5%) [4]. [^j_dinis-oliveira_oxidative_2016]
We confirmed the observation by others (Dubowski 1976; Mishra et al., 1989) that the rate of ethanol oxidation, a function predominantly exerted by the liver, is faster in women than in men. In the present study, the maximal rate of elimination (VMAX) was 10% higher in women than in men. [^BaraonaGenderDifferencesPharmacokinetics2001]
This resulted in a 47% greater AUC after oral ethanol in women than in men (45.9 +- 3.4 mg/dl 3 h vs. 31.2 +- 7; p , 0.01). [^BaraonaGenderDifferencesPharmacokinetics2001]

## Byproducts
although metabolites of ethanol, like acetate, can also reach the brain as products of first pass metabolism [85]. [^hernandez_lipids_2016]
A significant body of evidence indicates that acetaldehyde is accumulated in the colonic lumen due to enteric microbial fermentation (22, 23). [^basuroy_acetaldehyde_2005]
Intracolonic acetaldehyde level is dramatically increased by alcohol consumption (6, 20, 27). [^basuroy_acetaldehyde_2005]
In the gastrointestinal tract, acetaldehyde can be generated from ethanol through mucosal and/or bacterial alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) (Seitz and Oneta, 1998). [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
Accumulation of acetaldehyde in the colonic lumen could be due to low efficiency of bacterial aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) to metabolize acetaldehyde in the colon (Nosova et al., 1998). [^purohit_alcohol_2008]

## Unsorted
Catalase, a heme containing enzyme, is found in the peroxisomal fraction of the cell. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Fatty acid ethyl ester synthases catalyze the reaction between ethanol and a fatty acid to produce a fatty acyl ester. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]

# Interactions by Ethanol and Byproducts

alcohol hangover does not have a single cause that leads to one condition, but should be viewed as a syndrome. [^penning_alcohol_2012]


Treatment of macrophages with physiologically relevant doses (25 mM, 50 mM, 75 mM) of alcohol for 15 min significantly increased HSF-binding activity (Fig. 1B). A combination of LPS with alcohol (50 mM and 75 mM) resulted in a further augmentation of HSF DNA binding as indicated in the bar graph (Fig. 1B, lower panel), as compared with LPS or alcohol treatment alone (Fig. 1B). [^mandrekar_alcohol_2008]
Specifically, we show that in monocytes and macrophages, short-term alcohol increases HSF-1-binding activity and induces hsp70 mRNA and protein. [^mandrekar_alcohol_2008]
In neuronal cells, acute and chronic alcohol exposure induces hsp genes such as hsp70, hsp90, glucose-regulated protein (grp)78, and grp94 via HSF-1 activation [20, 37, 38]. [^mandrekar_alcohol_2008]
Whereas at first interpreted as a signal of cellular adaptation to stress and protection from the injury, it is now being recognized that hsps and its transcription factor HSF-1 can also contribute to cellular injury [40]. [^mandrekar_alcohol_2008]
Here, we show that although short-term alcohol alone does not affect hsp70, LPS-induced hsp70 promoter activity, mRNA, and protein are increased in macrophages. Hsp70 induction is regulated by cooperation from other transcription factors such as STAT1, which interacts directly with HSF-1 to induce hsp70 [45]. [^mandrekar_alcohol_2008]
Here, it is likely that acute alcohol directly increases transcription of hsp70, which in turn could repress TNF-α gene expression. Hsp70 could act via sequestration of NF-κB in the cytoplasm [43, 44] or direct binding to TNF-α and inhibition of its release [42] in acute alcohol exposure. [^mandrekar_alcohol_2008]
Thus, our results suggest that hsp90 inhibition may prevent the alcohol-induced augmentation of LPS-induced NF-κB-binding activity and TNF-α and subsequently reduce inflammation in ALD. Hence, we propose that hsp90 plays an important role in alcohol-induced inflammation. [^mandrekar_alcohol_2008]
1) acetaldehyde inhibits protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase) activity and slightly elevates the activation of p60c-Src and p125FAK, resulting in an increased protein tyrosine phosphorylation in human colonic mucosa; 2) acetaldehyde increases tyrosine phosphorylation of occludin, E-cadherin, and β-catenin; 3) acetaldehyde reduces the levels of detergent-insoluble fractions of TJ and AJ proteins, leading to redistribution of these proteins from the intercellular junctions; [^basuroy_acetaldehyde_2005]
Dr. Muralidharan hypothesized that TLR4 tolerance following alcohol exposure is mediated by stress proteins, including heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and heat shock protein 70 (hsp70). Primary human monocytes or murine RAW macrophages treated with LPS showed a reduction in proinflammatory mediator (IL-6, TNFα, IL-1β) release following 25 mM alcohol exposure, while the expression of HSF1 and hsp70 mRNA was increased subsequent to alcohol exposure. [^morris_alcohol_2015]
Female mice displayed a heightened inflammation after alcohol, and this may contribute to increased susceptibility to alcohol-related neurotoxicity in females. [^morris_alcohol_2015]
Low alcohol consumption improved left ventricular contractility. This was accompanied by reduced hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) superoxide dismutase (SOD-3) activity, and elevated nuclear respiratory factors (NRF)1/2, Forkhead box proteinO1 (FOXO-1), nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kB), and Akt expression, as well as an increase in cardiomyocyte survival. In contrast, high blood alcohol led to an increase in H2O2 level and SOD-3 activity, and a decrease in NRF1/2, FOXO-1, NF-kB, and Akt expression, resulting in a decrease in cardiomyocyte survival. Together, these findings suggest that low and high blood alcohol may produce opposite effects on cardiomyocytes. [^morris_alcohol_2015]
There was a significant increase in PLAT permeability in alcohol-exposed mice. PLAT cytokine (IL-6, TNFα, and GM-CSF) expression was unchanged 30 minutes following alcohol treatment; however, 24 hours after alcohol exposure, cytokine expression was higher compared to control animals. PLAT immunohistochemistry data revealed a significant increase in mast cells and neutrophils in rats after alcohol exposure. These results suggest that acute alcohol exposure results in increased mesenteric lymphatic permeability and PLAT inflammation. [^morris_alcohol_2015]
Drowsiness and impaired cognitive functioning are the two dominant features of alcohol hangover. [^penning_alcohol_2012]
Rohsenow et al. (2007) also found being tired (fatigue) and thirsty as most severe hangover symptoms, although in opposite order of the results of this survey. This is remarkable, since it has been suggested that these symptoms are primarily the result of sleep deprivation and dehydration, respectively (Verster et al., 2010). Yet, Rohsenow et al. (2007) controlled for sleep and liquid intake on the alcohol and placebo nights. [^penning_alcohol_2012]
The authors reported that nausea, fatigue, thirst and tension correlated best with the overall hangover severity (Ylikahri et al., 1974). [^penning_alcohol_2012]
The symptoms were categorized according to their assumed common biological relationship and include constitutional, pain, gastrointestinal, sleep and biological rhythms, sensory, cognitive, mood and sympathetic hyperactivity. The categorization was however not derived from data. [^penning_alcohol_2012]
Most commonly reported and most severe hangover symptoms were fatigue (95.5%) and thirst (89.1%). Factor analysis revealed 11 factors that together account for 62% of variance. The most prominent factor ‘drowsiness’ (explained variance 28.8%) included symptoms such as drowsiness, fatigue, sleepiness and weakness. The second factor ‘cognitive problems’ (explained variance 5.9%) included symptoms such as reduced alertness, memory and concentration problems. [^penning_alcohol_2012]
a loss of epithelium at the tips of the villi, haemorrhagic erosions and even haemorrhage in the lamina propria (Bode et al., 2001). Similar lesions were observed in volunteers 2-3 hours after ingestion of alcohol (15-20%, v/v) and in recently drinking alcohol abusing subjects (Bode et al., 2001). [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
The mucosal damage caused by alcohol might result in an impaired intestinal barrier function, enabling toxins of gut-inhabiting bacteria such as endotoxins to enter the systemic circulation and to contribute to liver injury after alcohol consumption. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
An ethanol-induced increase in intestinal permeability was also reported in human subjects when smaller molecules were used as a permeability probe. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
These studies clearly indicate that alcohol can increase intestinal permeability to various macromolecules including endotoxin. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
Furthermore, plasma endotoxin levels were also significantly elevated in actively drinking alcoholics without evidence of liver disease (Bode et al., 1987; Nolan, 1989), suggesting that alcohol itself can increase endotoxin levels presumably via increasing intestinal permeability to endotoxin. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
In mice, plasma endotoxin levels were significantly elevated 1.5 hour after intragastric administration of 6g/kg ethanol by gavage, and this was associated with significant small intestinal injury (Lambert et al., 2003). [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
These mice developed significant liver injury 6 hours after ethanol administration, suggesting that alcohol is the causal factor for endotoxemia. Both human and animal studies suggest that alcohol mediates the transfer of endotoxin from intestine to the liver that results in the elevation of plasma enotoxin levels. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
These studies suggest that alcohol may not only increase intestinal permeability to peptidoglycan, but also works synergistically with it to induce liver injury. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
In an intragstric infusion rat model of alcoholic liver injury, sterilization of intestine by antibiotics significantly attenuated liver injury by reducing plasma levels of endotoxin (Adachi et al., 1995), and in the same model, similar results were obtained by simultaneous feeding of probiotic lactobacillus GG bacteria (competitive inhibitor of Gram negative bacteria) to the rats (Nanji et al., 1994). [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
However, ethanol up to 5% concentration failed to increase paracellular permeability, suggesting that ethanol metabolism to acetaldehyde is required for the action. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
This study showed that ethanol increased paracellular permeability at 7.5% concentration. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
The importance of ethanol metabolism into acetaldehyde was further confirmed when acetaldehyde, and not ethanol, was shown to increase mucosal permeability in proximal rat colonic strips [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
In this study, ethanol exposure (1%, 2.5%, and 15%) increased expression of iNOS and increased production of NO and superoxide. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
These results suggest that NO and superoxide anion generated in response to ethanol exposure may react with each other to form peroxynitrite which in turn may cause damage to microtubule cytoskeleton and subsequently disrupt intestinal barrier function. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
Overgrowth of Gram negative bacteria can result in increased production of endotoxin which can escape into portal circulation leading to increased plasma levels of endotoxin. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
These studies suggest that chronic alcohol abuse can promote bacterial growth in the intestine; [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
Since the ALDH reaction occurs largely in the mitochondria, the mitochondrial NAD+/NADH redox ratio will be lowered. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Since the ADH reactions occur in the cytosol, the cytosolic NAD+/NADH redox ratio will be lowered. This ratio is reflected by the pyruvate/lactate ratio because of the reaction. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Because the ADH and ALDH2 reactions reduce NAD+ to NADH, the cellular NAD+/NADH redox ratio is lowered as a consequence of ethanol metabolism. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Important reactions inhibited because of this decreased NAD+/ NADH redox ratio are:
* Glycolysis
* Citric Acid Cycle (ketogenesis favored)
* Pyruvate Dehydrogenase
* Fatty Acid Oxidation
* Gluconeogenesis [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Acetaldehyde derived from catalase-dependent oxidation of alcohol in the brain has been suggested to play a role in the development of tolerance to alcohol, to voluntary ethanol consumption and to the positive reinforcing actions of ethanol, perhaps via interaction with catecholamines to produce various condensation products. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Fatty acid ethyl esters can be toxic, inhibiting DNA and protein synthesis. When oxidative metabolism of ethanol is blocked, there is an increase in ethanol metabolism to the fatty acid ethyl ester. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
SOME SUGGESTED CAUSES FOR ALCOHOL TOXICITY
- Redox state changes in the NAD/NADH ratio
- Acetaldehyde formation
- Mitochondrial damamge
- Cytokine formation (TNFα)
- Kupffer cell activation
- Membrane actions of ethanol
- Hypoxia
- Immune actions
- Oxidative stress [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
CYTOCHROME P4502E1 (CYP2E1)
- A minor pathway for alcohol metabolism
- Produces acetaldehyde, 1-hydroxyethyl radical
- Responsible for alcohol-drug interactions
- Activates toxins such as acetaminophen,CCl4, halothane,benzene,halogenated hydrocarbons to reactive toxic intermediates
- Activates procarcinogens such as nitrosamines, azo compounds to active carcinogens
- Activates molecular oxygen to reactive oxygen species such as superoxide radical anion, H202, hydroxyl radical
SUGGESTED MECHANISMS FOR METABOLIC TOLERANCE TO ALCOHOL
- Induction of alcohol dehydrogenases
- Increased shuttle capacity
- Increased reoxidation of NADH by mitochondria
- Induction of CYP2E1
- Hypermetabolic state
- Increased release of cytokines or prostaglandins which elevate oxygen
    consumption by hepatocytes [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
However, it is important to note that alcohol-derived calories are produced at the expense of the metabolism of normal nutrients since alcohol will be oxidized preferentially over other nutrients (19–23). [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]

# Supplements

both EGF and l-glutamine prevent the acetaldehyde-induced changes in protein tyrosine phosphorylation, the levels of detergent-insoluble TJ and AJ proteins, and redistribution of these proteins from the intercellular junctions. [^basuroy_acetaldehyde_2005]
The protective effect of l-glutamine on acetaldehyde-induced permeability is mediated by EGF-receptor tyrosine kinase activity (25). [^basuroy_acetaldehyde_2005]

These findings suggest that alcohol may accentuate gastrointestinal blood loss associated with unbuffered aspirin ingestion. [^goulston_alcohol_1968]



## Vitamin C
Anti-oxidant prevent oxidative adducts
Only works as preloaded

## Creatine
cellular hydration
assorted effects

## Taurine
nAC taurine release preload
SAMe and GSH preservation
Liver oxidative stress

##SAMe
Methylation
Methionine metabolism preservation
- too expensive

## Aspirin
COX inhibitor, nonselective
gastric ADH inhibitor
minor uncoupling effects in mitochondria
Aspirin can increase the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding
-> Only if really bad hangover...

## Zinc
gut disfunction prevention
immune modulation
Taken before to inhibit ethanol induced gut permeability

### Zinc-carnosine (expensive)
* prep according to EP0303380B1
* dose
 - 75 mg oral rinse split 4/day
 - 150 mg/d

## Melatonin
brain SCN clock changes

## Ornithine
pH modulation
Ammonia recycling

## Glutamine
Gut dysfunction prevention

## Glucose
Hypoglycemia, short term

## Glucose Polymer
Hypoglycemia, long lasting

## Fructose/Sucrose
NADH->NAD+ conversion substrate
after

## Saline (Banana Bag)
Hydration status
General health

## Beta-Alanine
Pre-loaded pH buffer in muscle
Or canosine...

## N-acetylcysteine
intestinal antioxidant
glutathione substrate

## Alanine
gut tight junction activation

## Leucine
gut tight junction activation

## Curcumin

## Grape Seed Extract
iNOS inhibition

## Agmatine
iNOS and peroxynitrite reduction
Neurotransmitter

## Acetyl-L-carnitine
Mitochondria transport and uncoupling

## Alpha-Lipoic Acid
Fe sequestration in mitochondria
glutathione upregulation
AMPK inhibition/leptin mimesis

## Malate
malate-aspartate shuttle
Oat supplementation ameliorated all of these changes (Keshavarzian et al., 2001). Studies are required to understand the mechanisms by which oat supplement preserves intestinal permeability. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
Zinc supplementation attenuated ethanol-induced increases in serum endotoxin levels, serum ALT activity, and hepatic TNF-α levels. These changes were associated with prevention of ethanol-induced liver injury (Lambert et al., 2003; Lambert et al., 2004). [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
These results suggest that zinc brought these changes, at least in part, by preventing ethanol-induced transfer of endotoxin from intestine to circulation which could be ascribed to preservation of intestinal morphology and permeability. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
Pretreatment with iNOS inhibitor (L-N6-1-iminoethyl-lysine), peroxynitrite scavengers (urate or L-cysteine) or superoxide anion scavenger (superoxide dismutase) attenuated the damage caused by ethanol. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
Suppressing the growth of Gram negative bacteria in the intestine may reduce the amount of endotoxin which in turn may attenuate endotoxin-associated organ damage. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
Whether probiotic treatment can attenuate ALD in humans needs further investigation. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
it was shown that that Na+ - coupled nutrient (glucose, alanine, or leucine) transport triggers contraction of perijunctional actomyosin, thereby increasing intestinal tight junction permeability and enhancing absorption of nutrients (Madara and Pappenheimer, 1987). [^purohit_alcohol_2008]
Agents or conditions which enhance reoxidation of NADH by the respiratory chain can increase the rate of alcohol metabolism e.g. uncoupling agents can accelerate ethanol oxidation in the fed metabolic state (38,39). [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]
Several drugs, including H2 receptor blockers such as cimetidine or ranitidine, or aspirin inhibit stomach ADH activity. This will decrease first pass metabolism by the stomach, and hence, increase blood alcohol concentrations. [^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]

# Appendix A: Metadata on Studies

A total of 1410 participants completed the questionnaire, of which 56.1% (n = 791, 31.3% men and 68.7% women) had experienced at least one hangover during the last month. [^penning_alcohol_2012]
Mice were treated with three intragastric doses of zinc sulfate at 5 mg zinc element/kg each dosing, with an interval of 12 hours, prior to acute ethanol challenge with a single oral dose of 6 g/kg ethanol. [^purohit_alcohol_2008]

[^CaroInhibitionCYP2E1catalytic2005]

# Bibliography

[^acquaah-mensah_ethanol_2006]: Acquaah-Mensah, George K., Vikas Misra, and Shyam Biswal. 2006. Ethanol sensitivity: a central role for CREB transcription regulation in the cerebellum. BMC genomics 7 (1): 308. <https://bmcgenomics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2164-7-308>.
[^afshar_acute_2015]: Afshar, Majid, Stephanie Richards, Dean Mann, Alan Cross, Gordon B. Smith, Giora Netzer, Elizabeth Kovacs, and Jeffrey Hasday. 2015. Acute immunomodulatory effects of binge alcohol ingestion. *Alcohol* 49 (1): 57–64. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2014.10.002>.
[^agarwal_assessing_2016]: Agarwal, Sanjiv, Victor L. Fulgoni, and Harris R. Lieberman. 2016. Assessing alcohol intake & its dose-dependent effects on liver enzymes by 24-h recall and questionnaire using NHANES 2001-2010 data. Nutrition Journal 15 (June). <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12937-016-0180-y>.
[^ahn_enhancement_2015]: Ahn, Chul Won, Do Young Kwon, Doo Sung Jun, Yoo Min Lee, and Young Chul Kim. 2015. Enhancement of cysteine catabolism into taurine impacts glutathione homeostasis in rats challenged with ethanol. *Amino Acids* 47 (6): 1273–77. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00726-015-1969-2>.
[^AhnProtectiveeffectsagmatine2012]: Ahn, Soo Kyung, Samin Hong, Yu Mi Park, Ja Yong Choi, Won Taek Lee, Kyung Ah Park, and Jong Eun Lee. 2012. Protective effects of agmatine on lipopolysaccharide-injured microglia and inducible nitric oxide synthase activity. *Life Sciences* 91 (25–26): 1345–50. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2012.10.010>.
[^albano_alcohol_2006]: Albano, Emanuele. 2006. Alcohol, oxidative stress and free radical damage. *Proceedings of the Nutrition Society* 65 (03): 278–90. <https://doi.org/10.1079/PNS2006496>.
[^AlbanoNewconceptspathogenesis2008]: Albano, Emanuele. 2008. Oxidative mechanisms in the pathogenesis of alcoholic liver disease. *Molecular Aspects of Medicine*, Molecular Aspects of Liver Disease, 29 (1): 9–16. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mam.2007.09.004>.
[^altura_expression_2003]: Altura, Burton M, Adele B Kostellow, Aimin Zhang, Wenyan Li, Gene A Morrill, Raj K Gupta, and Bella T Altura. 2003. Expression of the nuclear factor-κB and proto-oncogenes c-Fos and c-Jun are induced by low extracellular mg2+ in aortic and cerebral vascular smooth muscle cells: possible links to hypertension, atherogenesis, and stroke. *American Journal of Hypertension* 16 (9): 701–7. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0895-7061(03)00987-7>.
[^AnjiGuardianGeneticMessengerRNABinding2016]: Anji, Antje, and Meena Kumari. 2016. Guardian of Genetic Messenger-RNA-Binding Proteins. *Biomolecules* 6 (1). <https://doi.org/10.3390/biom6010004>.
[^AnkePharmacokineticpharmacodynamicdrug2004]: Anke, Jennifer, and Iqbal Ramzan. 2004. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug interactions with Kava (Piper methysticum Forst. f.). *Journal of Ethnopharmacology* 93 (2–3): 153–60. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2004.04.009>.
[^ArafaProtectiverolecarnitine2003]: Arafa, Hossam M. M, and Mohamed M Sayed-Ahmed. 2003. Protective role of carnitine esters against alcohol-induced gastric lesions in rats. *Pharmacological Research* 48 (3): 285–90. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S1043-6618(03)00154-3>.
[^AugustyniakinfluenceLcarnitinesuplementation2010]: Augustyniak, Agnieszka, and Elżbieta Skrzydlewska. 2010. The influence of L-carnitine suplementation on the antioxidative abilities of serum and the central nervous system of ethanol-induced rats. *Metabolic Brain Disease* 25 (4): 381–89. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-010-9217-7>.
[^bala_acute_2014]: Bala, Shashi, Miguel Marcos, Arijeet Gattu, Donna Catalano, and Gyongyi Szabo. 2014. Acute Binge Drinking Increases Serum Endotoxin and Bacterial DNA Levels in Healthy Individuals. *PLoS ONE* 9 (5). <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0096864>.
[^bang_clinical_2015]: Bang, Joon Seok, Yoon Hee Chung, Su Jin Chung, Ho Sung Lee, Eun Ho Song, Yong Kyoo Shin, Yu Jeung Lee, Hyoung-Chun Kim, Yunsung Nam, and Ji Hoon Yeong. 2015. Clinical effect of a polysaccharide-rich extract of Acanthopanax senticosus on alcohol hangover. *Die Pharmazie-An International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences* 70 (4): 269–273. <http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/govi/pharmaz/2015/00000070/00000004/art00010>.
[^BaraonaGenderDifferencesPharmacokinetics2001]: Baraona, Enrique, Chaim S. Abittan, Kazufumi Dohmen, Michelle Moretti, Gabriele Pozzato, Zev W. Chayes, Clara Schaefer, and Charles S. Lieber. 2001. Gender Differences in Pharmacokinetics of Alcohol. *Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research* 25 (4): 502–7. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-0277.2001.tb02242.x>.
[^barbier_dna_2015]: Barbier, Estelle, Jenica D. Tapocik, Nathan Juergens, Caleb Pitcairn, Abbey Borich, Jesse R. Schank, Hui Sun, et al. 2015. DNA Methylation in the Medial Prefrontal Cortex Regulates Alcohol-Induced Behavior and Plasticity. *Journal of Neuroscience* 35 (15): 6153–64. <https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4571-14.2015>.
[^BarrOpposingEffectsAlcohol2016]: Barr, Tasha, Christa Helms, Kathleen Grant, and Ilhem Messaoudi. 2016. Opposing Effects of Alcohol on the Immune System. *Progress in neuro-psychopharmacology & biological psychiatry* 65 (February): 242–51. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.09.001>.
[^Bassini-CameronGlutamineprotectsincreases2008]: Bassini-Cameron, A, A Monteiro, A Gomes, J P S Werneck-de-Castro, and L Cameron. 2008. Glutamine protects against increases in blood ammonia in football players in an exercise intensity-dependent way. *British Journal of Sports Medicine* 42 (4): 260–66. <https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2007.040378>.
[^basuroy_acetaldehyde_2005]: Basuroy, S., P. Sheth, C. M. Mansbach, and R. K. Rao. 2005. Acetaldehyde disrupts tight junctions and adherens junctions in human colonic mucosa: protection by EGF and l-glutamine. *American Journal of Physiology - Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology* 289 (2): G367–75. <https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpgi.00464.2004>.
[^BelenkyNADmetabolismhealth2007]: Belenky, Peter, Katrina L. Bogan, and Charles Brenner. 2007. NAD(+) metabolism in health and disease. *Trends in Biochemical Sciences* 32 (1): 12–19. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2006.11.006>.
[^berman_effect_2003]: Berman, P. A. M., I. Baumgarten, and D. L. Viljoen. 2003. Effect of oral fructose on ethanol elimination from the bloodstream: research in action. *South African journal of science* 99 (1–2): 47–50. <https://journals.co.za/content/sajsci/99/1-2/EJC97584>.
[^Beulenseffectmoderatealcohol2007]: Beulens, J. W. J., L. J. C. van Loon, F. J. Kok, M. Pelsers, T. Bobbert, J. Spranger, A. Helander, and H. F. J. Hendriks. 2007. The effect of moderate alcohol consumption on adiponectin oligomers and muscle oxidative capacity: a human intervention study. *Diabetologia* 50 (7): 1388–92. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-007-0699-8>.
[^BhutadaInhibitoryeffectberberine2010]: Bhutada, Pravinkumar, Yogita Mundhada, Kuldeep Bansod, Sumit Rathod, Rahul Hiware, Pankaj Dixit, Sudhir Umathe, and Dharmendra Mundhada. 2010. Inhibitory effect of berberine on the motivational effects of ethanol in mice. *Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, Intracellular Ca-homeostasis in schizophrenia* 34 (8): 1472–79. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.08.005>.
[^bode_effect_2003]: Bode, Christiane, and J. Christian Bode. 2003. Effect of alcohol consumption on the gut. *Best Practice & Research Clinical Gastroenterology* 17 (4): 575–592. <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1521691803000349>.
[^BoganNicotinicAcidNicotinamide2008]: Bogan, Katrina L., and Charles Brenner. 2008. Nicotinic Acid, Nicotinamide, and Nicotinamide Riboside: A Molecular Evaluation of NAD+ Precursor Vitamins in Human Nutrition. *Annual Review of Nutrition* 28 (1): 115–30. <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.nutr.28.061807.155443>.
[^BoyeMetabolicderivativesalcohol2016]: Boye, Alex, Yu-Hong Zou, and Yan Yang. 2016. Metabolic derivatives of alcohol and the molecular culprits of fibro-hepatocarcinogenesis: Allies or enemies? *World Journal of Gastroenterology* 22 (1): 50–71. <https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v22.i1.50>.
[^bustamante_alterations_2012]: Bustamante, Juanita, Analia G. Karadayian, Silvia Lores-Arnaiz, and Rodolfo A. Cutrera. 2012. Alterations of motor performance and brain cortex mitochondrial function during ethanol hangover. *Alcohol* 46 (5): 473–79. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2011.09.027>.
[^verster_current_2010]: C. Verster, Joris, Richard Stephens, Renske Penning, Damaris Rohsenow, John McGeary, Dan Levy, Adele McKinney, et al. 2010. The Alcohol Hangover Research Group Consensus Statement on Best Practice in Alcohol Hangover Research. *Current Drug Abuse Reviewse* 3 (2): 116–26. <https://doi.org/10.2174/1874473711003020116>.
[^calabrese_effects_2001]: Calabrese, V., G. Scapagnini, C. Catalano, F. Dinotta, T. E. Bates, M. Calvani, and A. M. Giuffrida Stella. 2001. Effects of Acetyl-L-Carnitine on the Formation of Fatty Acid Ethyl Esters in Brain and Peripheral Organs after Short-Term Ethanol Administration in Rat. *Neurochemical Research* 26 (2): 167–74. <https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1011003030287>.
[^CalabreseLongtermethanoladministration2002]: Calabrese, V., G. Scapagnini, S. Latteri, C. Colombrita, A. Ravagna, C. Catalano, G. Pennisi, M. Calvani, and D. A. Butterfield. 2002. Long-term ethanol administration enhances age-dependent modulation of redox state in different brain regions in the rat: protection by acetyl carnitine. *International Journal of Tissue Reactions* 24 (3): 97–104.
[^calissendorff_alcohol_2006]: Calissendorff, Jan, Olle Danielsson, Kerstin Brismar, and Sven Röjdmark. 2006. Alcohol ingestion does not affect serum levels of peptide YY but decreases both total and octanoylated ghrelin levels in healthy subjects. *Metabolism* 55 (12): 1625–29. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2006.08.003>.
[^CaoProtectiveeffectsPenthorum2015]: Cao, Yi-Wei, Yun Jiang, Da-Yong Zhang, Meng Wang, Wan-Sheng Chen, Huanxing Su, Yi-Tao Wang, and Jian-Bo Wan. 2015. Protective effects of Penthorum chinense Pursh against chronic ethanol-induced liver injury in mice. *Journal of Ethnopharmacology* 161 (February): 92–98. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2014.12.013>.
[^CaoSingleDoseAdministration2011]: Cao, Yu, Hai-jun Qu, Ping Li, Chun-bo Wang, Le-xin Wang, and Zhi-wu Han. 2011. Single Dose Administration of L-Carnitine Improves Antioxidant Activities in Healthy Subjects. *The Tohoku Journal of Experimental Medicine* 224 (3): 209–13. <https://doi.org/10.1620/tjem.224.209>.
[^CaroInhibitionCYP2E1catalytic2005]: Caro, Andres A., and Arthur I. Cederbaum. 2005. Inhibition of CYP2E1 catalytic activity in vitro by S-adenosyl-l-methionine. *Biochemical Pharmacology* 69 (7): 1081–93. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2005.01.007>.
[^cederbaum_alcohol_2012]: Cederbaum, Arthur I. 2012. ALCOHOL METABOLISM. *Clinics in liver disease* 16 (4): 667–85. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2012.08.002>.
[^cefaratti_effect_2005]: Cefaratti, Christie, Andrew Young, and Andrea Romani. 2005. Effect of ethanol administration on Mg2+ transport across liver plasma membrane. *Alcohol* 36 (1): 5–18. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2005.04.010>.
[^Cerdanredoxswitchredox2006]: Cerdán, Sebastián, Tiago B. Rodrigues, Alejandra Sierra, Marina Benito, Luis L. Fonseca, Carla P. Fonseca, and María L. García-Martín. 2006. The redox switch/redox coupling hypothesis. *Neurochemistry International*, Glutamate in CNS Metabolism and Neurotransmission: Interactions at the Inter and Intracellular Level, 48 (6): 523–30. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuint.2005.12.036>.
[^cha_acetylcarnitine-mediated_1995]: Cha, Youn-Soo, and Dileep S Sachan. 1995. Acetylcarnitine-mediated inhibition of ethanol oxidation in hepatocytes. *Alcohol* 12 (3): 289–94. <https://doi.org/10.1016/0741-8329(95)00007-E>.
[]: Chan, Lingtak-Neander. 2004. Nutritional support in acute renal failure: *Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition and Metabolic Care* 7 (2): 207–12. <https://doi.org/10.1097/00075197-200403000-00016>.
[]: Chang, Bing, Lixuan Sang, Ying wang, Jing Tong, Dai Zhang, and Bingyuan Wang. 2013. The protective effect of VSL#3 on intestinal permeability in a rat model of alcoholic intestinal injury. *BMC Gastroenterology* 13 (October): 151. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-230X-13-151>.
[]: Chaudhry, Kamaljit K., Pradeep K. Shukla, Hina Mir, Bhargavi Manda, Ruchika Gangwar, Nikki Yadav, Megan McMullen, Laura E. Nagy, and RadhaKrishna Rao. 2016. Glutamine Supplementation Attenuates Ethanol-Induced Disruption of Apical Junctional Complexes in Colonic Epithelium and Ameliorates Gut Barrier Dysfunction and Fatty Liver in Mice. *The Journal of nutritional biochemistry* 27 (January): 16–26. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.08.012>.
[]: Chen, Ning, Mi Yang, Muke Zhou, Jing Xiao, Jian Guo, and Li He. 2017. L-carnitine for cognitive enhancement in people without cognitive impairment. booktitle={Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews}, edited by The Cochrane Collaboration. publisher={John Wiley & Sons, Ltd}. <http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/14651858.CD009374.pub3>.
[]: Chen, Ya-Ling, Hsiang-Chi Peng, Shan-Wen Tan, Cheng-Yuh Tsai, Yi-Huei Huang, Hao-Yu Wu, and Suh-Ching Yang. 2013. Amelioration of ethanol-induced liver injury in rats by nanogold flakes. *Alcohol* 47 (6): 467–72. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2013.05.006>.
[]: Cho, C. H., C. W. Ogle, S. H. Wong, and M. W. L. Koo. 1985. Effects of Zinc Sulphate on Ethanol- and Indomethacin-Induced Ulceration and Changes in Prostaglandin E2 and Histamine Levels in the Rat Gastric Glandular Mucosa. *Digestion* 32 (4): 288–95. <https://doi.org/10.1159/000199250>.
[]: Circu, Magdalena L., Ronald E. Maloney, and Tak Yee Aw. 2017. Low glucose stress decreases cellular NADH and mitochondrial ATP in colonic epithelial cancer cells: Influence of mitochondrial substrates. *Chemico-Biological Interactions* 264 (February): 16–24. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbi.2017.01.001>.
[]: Comporti, Mario, Cinzia Signorini, Silvia Leoncini, Concetta Gardi, Lucia Ciccoli, Anna Giardini, Daniela Vecchio, and Beatrice Arezzini. 2010. Ethanol-induced oxidative stress: basic knowledge. *Genes & Nutrition* 5 (2): 101–9. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s12263-009-0159-9>.
[]: Cremer, D. R., R. Rabeler, A. Roberts, and B. Lynch. 2006. Long-term safety of α-lipoic acid (ALA) consumption: A 2-year study. *Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology* 46 (3): 193–201. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yrtph.2006.06.003>.
[]: Crews, Fulton T., Dipak K. Sarkar, Liya Qin, Jian Zou, Nadka Boyadjieva, and Ryan P. Vetreno. 2015. Neuroimmune Function and the Consequences of Alcohol Exposure. *Alcohol Research : Current Reviews* 37 (2): 331–51. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4590627/>.
[]: Crews, Fulton T., and Ryan P. Vetreno. 2014. Neuroimmune Basis of Alcoholic Brain Damage. booktitle={International Review of Neurobiology}, 118:315–57. publisher={Elsevier}. <http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780128012840000105>.
[]: Daher, Costantine F., Rania N. Berberi, and George M. Baroody. 2003. Effect of acute and chronic moderate alcohol consumption on fasted and postprandial lipemia in the rat. *Food and Chemical Toxicology* 41 (11): 1551–59. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0278-6915(03)00172-8>.
[]: Dai, Xing, Joseph Thavundayil, Sandra Santella, and Christina Gianoulakis. 2007. Response of the HPA-axis to alcohol and stress as a function of alcohol dependence and family history of alcoholism. *Psychoneuroendocrinology* 32 (3): 293–305. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2007.01.004>.
[]: Dar, M. Saeed. 2015. Ethanol-Induced Cerebellar Ataxia: Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms. *The Cerebellum* 14 (4): 447–65. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-014-0638-4>.
[]: Das, Subir Kumar, and D. M. Vasudevan. 2007. Alcohol-induced oxidative stress. *Life Sciences* 81 (3): 177–87. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2007.05.005>.
[]: Ding, Ren-Bo, Ke Tian, Li-Li huang, Cheng-Wei He, Yun Jiang, Yi-Tao Wang, and Jian-Bo Wan. 2012. Herbal medicines for the prevention of alcoholic liver disease: A review. *Journal of Ethnopharmacology* 144 (3): 457–65. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2012.09.044>.
[]: Do, T. H. T., F. Gaboriau, I. Morel, S. Lepage, I. Cannie, O. Loréal, and G. Lescoat. 2013. Modulation of ethanol effect on hepatocyte proliferation by polyamines. *Amino Acids* 44 (3): 869–77. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00726-012-1413-9>.
[]: Dopico, Alex M., Anna N. Bukiya, Guruprasad Kuntamallappanavar, and Jianxi Liu. 2016. Modulation of BK channels by ethanol. *International review of neurobiology* 128: 239–79. <https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.irn.2016.03.019>.
[]: Eid, Nabil, Yuko Ito, Kentaro Maemura, and Yoshinori Otsuki. 2013. Elevated autophagic sequestration of mitochondria and lipid droplets in steatotic hepatocytes of chronic ethanol-treated rats: an immunohistochemical and electron microscopic study. *Journal of Molecular Histology* 44 (3): 311–26. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10735-013-9483-x>.
[]: Eid, Nabil, Yuko Ito, and Yoshinori Otsuki. 2012. Enhanced mitophagy in Sertoli cells of ethanol-treated rats: morphological evidence and clinical relevance. *Journal of Molecular Histology* 43 (1): 71–80. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10735-011-9372-0>.
[]: El-Sayed, Mahmoud S., Nagia Ali, and Zeinab El-Sayed Ali. 2005. Interaction between alcohol and exercise: physiological and haematological implications. *Sports Medicine (Auckland, N.Z.)* 35 (3): 257–69.
[]: Estruch, R., E. Sacanella, F. Mota, G. Chiva-Blanch, E. Ant?nez, E. Casals, R. Deulofeu, D. Rotilio, C. Andres-Lacueva, and R.M. Lamuela-Raventos. 2011. Moderate consumption of red wine, but not gin, decreases erythrocyte superoxide dismutase activity: A randomised cross-over trial? *Nutrition, Metabolism and Cardiovascular Diseases* 21 (1): 46–53. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.numecd.2009.07.006>.
[]: Ezequiel Leite, L., and M. J. Nobre. 2012. The negative effects of alcohol hangover on high-anxiety phenotype rats are influenced by the glutamate receptors of the dorsal midbrain. *Neuroscience* 213 (June): 93–105. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.04.009>.
[]: Fernandez-Checa, Jose C., and Neil Kaplowitz. 2005. Hepatic mitochondrial glutathione: transport and role in disease and toxicity. *Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology*, Membrane Transporters in Toxicology, 204 (3): 263–73. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2004.10.001>.
[]: Ferreira, P. M. P., G. C. G. Militão, and R. M. Freitas. 2009. Lipoic acid effects on lipid peroxidation level, superoxide dismutase activity and monoamines concentration in rat hippocampus. *Neuroscience Letters* 464 (2): 131–34. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2009.08.051>.
[]: Ferreira Seiva, Fbio Rodrigues, Juliana Fujihara Amauchi, Katiucha Karolina Ribeiro Rocha, Gisele Aparecida Souza, Geovana Xavier Ebaid, Regina Miranda Burneiko, and Ethel Lourenzi Barbosa Novelli. 2009. Effects of N-acetylcysteine on alcohol abstinence and alcohol-induced adverse effects in rats. *Alcohol* 43 (2): 127–35. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2008.12.003>.
[]: Flanagan, Judith L., Peter A. Simmons, Joseph Vehige, Mark DP Willcox, and Qian Garrett. 2010. Role of carnitine in disease. *Nutrition & Metabolism* 7 (April): 30. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-7075-7-30>.
[]: Fliegel, Sarah, Ines Brand, Rainer Spanagel, and Hamid R Noori. 2013. Ethanol-induced alterations of amino acids measured by in vivo microdialysis in rats: a meta-analysis. *In Silico Pharmacology* 1 (May). <https://doi.org/10.1186/2193-9616-1-7>.
[]: Forsyth, Christopher B., Robin M. Voigt, and Ali. Keshavarzian. 2014. Intestinal CYP2E1: A mediator of alcohol-induced gut leakiness. *Redox Biology* 3: 40–46. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2014.10.002>.
[]: Gao, Bin, and Ramon Bataller. 2011. Alcoholic Liver Disease: Pathogenesis and New Therapeutic Targets. *Gastroenterology* 141 (5): 1572–85. <https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2011.09.002>.
[]: Ge, Chen-Xu, Rong Yu, Min-Xuan Xu, Pei-Qin Li, Chen-Yu Fan, Jian-Mei Li, and Ling-Dong Kong. 2016. Betaine prevented fructose-induced NAFLD by regulating LXRα/PPARα pathway and alleviating ER stress in rats. *European Journal of Pharmacology* 770 (January): 154–64. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2015.11.043>.
[]: Gentry, R. Thomas, Enrique Baraona, Imran Amir, Risto Roine, Zev W. Chayes, Rajish Sharma, and Charles S. Lieber. 1999. Mechanism of the aspirin-induced rise in blood alcohol levels. *Life Sciences* 65 (23): 2505–12. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0024-3205(99)00517-2>.
[]: George, Akash K., Jyotirmaya Behera, Kimberly E. Kelly, Yuankun Zhai, and Neetu Tyagi. 2017. Hydrogen sulfide, endoplasmic reticulum stress and alcohol mediated neurotoxicity. *Brain research bulletin* 130 (April): 251. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2017.02.002>.
[]: Gharzouli, Kamel, Smain Amira, Akila Gharzouli, and Seddik Khennouf. 2002. Gastroprotective effects of honey and glucose-fructose-sucrose-maltose mixture against ethanol-, indomethacin-, and acidified aspirin-induced lesions in the rat. *Experimental and Toxicologic Pathology* 54 (3): 217–21. <https://doi.org/10.1078/0940-2993-00255>.
[]: Gianturco, Vincenzo, Giovanni Troisi, Alessia Bellomo, Sciaila Bernardini, Elisa D’Ottavio, Valeria Formosa, Cristina Lo Iacono, Walter Verrusio, Benedetta Marigliano, and Vincenzo Marigliano. 2013. Impact of combined therapy with alpha-lipoic and ursodeoxycolic acid on nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: double-blind, randomized clinical trial of efficacy and safety. *Hepatology International* 7 (2): 570–76. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s12072-012-9387-y>.
[]: Goasduff, Thierry, and Arthur I. Cederbaum. 1999. NADPH-Dependent Microsomal Electron Transfer Increases Degradation of CYP2E1 by the Proteasome Complex: Role of Reactive Oxygen Species. *Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics* 370 (2): 258–70. <https://doi.org/10.1006/abbi.1999.1399>.
[]: Goasduff, Thierry, and Arthur I. Cederbaum. 2000. CYP2E1 Degradation by in Vitro Reconstituted Systems: Role of the Molecular Chaperone hsp90. *Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics* 379 (2): 321–30. <https://doi.org/10.1006/abbi.2000.1870>.
[]: Goulston, Kerry, and Allan R. Cooke. 1968. Alcohol, aspirin, and gastrointestinal bleeding. *Br Med J* 4 (5632): 664–665. <http://www.bmj.com/content/4/5632/664.short>.
[]: Grasselli, Elena, Andrea D. Compalati, Adriana Voci, Giulia Vecchione, Milena Ragazzoni, Gabriella Gallo, Paolo Borro, Alessandro Sumberaz, Gianni Testino, and Laura Vergani. 2014. Altered oxidative stress/antioxidant status in blood of alcoholic subjects is associated with alcoholic liver disease. *Drug and Alcohol Dependence* 143 (October): 112–19. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2014.07.013>.
[]: Guidi, Chiara, Lucia Potenza, Piero Sestili, Chiara Martinelli, Michele Guescini, Laura Stocchi, Sabrina Zeppa, Emanuela Polidori, Giosuè Annibalini, and Vilberto Stocchi. 2008. Differential effect of creatine on oxidatively-injured mitochondrial and nuclear DNA. *Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - General Subjects* 1780 (1): 16–26. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2007.09.018>.
[]: Halaris, Angelos, and John Plietz. 2007. Agmatine. *CNS drugs* 21 (11): 885–900. <http://link.springer.com/article/10.2165/00023210-200721110-00002>.
[]: Han, Kyu-Ho, Naoto Hashimoto, and Michihiro Fukushima. 2016. Relationships among alcoholic liver disease, antioxidants, and antioxidant enzymes. *World Journal of Gastroenterology* 22 (1): 37–49. <https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v22.i1.37>.
[]: Haorah, J, B Knipe, and Y Persidsky. 2011. Stabilization of superoxide dismutase by acetylLcarnitine in human brain endothelium during alcohol exposure: Novel protective approach. *Free radical biology & medicine* 51 (8): 1601–9. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.06.020>.
[._2016]: Harada, Sei, Toru Takebayashi, Ayako Kurihara, Miki Akiyama, Asako Suzuki, Yoko Hatakeyama, Daisuke Sugiyama, et al. 2016. Metabolomic profiling reveals novel biomarkers of alcohol intake and alcohol-induced liver injury in community-dwelling men. *Environmental Health and Preventive Medicine* 21 (1): 18–26. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s12199-015-0494-y>.
[]: Henzel, Karin, Christian Thorborg, Michael Hofmann, Guido Zimmer, and Ulrich Leuschner. 2004. Toxicity of ethanol and acetaldehyde in hepatocytes treated with ursodeoxycholic or tauroursodeoxycholic acid. *Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Cell Research* 1644 (1): 37–45. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2003.10.017>.
[]: Hernández, José A., Rosa C. López-Sánchez, and Adela Rendón-Ramírez. 2016. Lipids and Oxidative Stress Associated with Ethanol-Induced Neurological Damage. *Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity* 2016. <https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/1543809>.
[]: Hogewoning, A, AJAE Van de Loo, M Mackus, SJ Raasveld, R De Zeeuw, ER Bosma, NH Bouwmeester, KA Brookhuis, J Garssen, and JC Verster. 2016. Characteristics of social drinkers with and without a hangover after heavy alcohol consumption. *Substance Abuse and Rehabilitation* 7 (November): 161–67. <https://doi.org/10.2147/SAR.S119361>.
[]: Holecek, Milan. 2010. Three targets of branched-chain amino acid supplementation in the treatment of liver disease. *Nutrition* 26 (5): 482–90. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nut.2009.06.027>.
[]: Hong, Yang Hee. 2016. Effects of the herb mixture, DTS20, on oxidative stress and plasma alcoholic metabolites after alcohol consumption in healthy young men. *Integrative Medicine Research* 5 (4): 309–16. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imr.2015.10.001>.
[]: Horibe, Akio, Nabil Eid, Yuko Ito, Hitomi Hamaoka, Yoshihisa Tanaka, and Yoichi Kondo. 2017. Upregulated Autophagy in Sertoli Cells of Ethanol-Treated Rats Is Associated with Induction of Inducible Nitric Oxide Synthase (iNOS), Androgen Receptor Suppression and Germ Cell Apoptosis. *International Journal of Molecular Sciences* 18 (5). <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18051061>.
[]: Huan, Jian-Ya, John M. Streicher, Lisa A. Bleyle, and Dennis R. Koop. 2004. Proteasome-dependent degradation of cytochromes P450 2E1 and 2B1 expressed in tetracycline-regulated HeLa cells. *Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology*, Mechanisms Regulating Enzymes Involved in Xenobiotic Disposition: A Tribute to Ed Bresnick, 199 (3): 332–43. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2003.12.019>.
[]: I, Das, Burch Re, and Hahn Hk. 1984. Effects of zinc deficiency on ethanol metabolism and alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase activities. *The Journal of laboratory and clinical medicine* 104 (4): 610–17. <http://europepmc.org/abstract/med/6384394>.
[]: Irwin, Christopher, Michael Leveritt, David Shum, and Ben Desbrow. 2013. The effects of dehydration, moderate alcohol consumption, and rehydration on cognitive functions. *Alcohol* 47 (3): 203–13. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2012.12.016>.
[]: J Dinis-Oliveira, Ricardo. 2016. Oxidative and non-oxidative metabolomics of ethanol. *Current drug metabolism* 17 (4): 327–335. <http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/ben/cdm/2016/00000017/00000004/art00005>.
[]: Jaurigue, Maryconi M, and Mitchell S Cappell. 2014. Therapy for alcoholic liver disease. *World Journal of Gastroenterology : WJG* 20 (9): 2143–58. <https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v20.i9.2143>.
[]: Ji, Cheng, and Neil Kaplowitz. 2003. Betaine decreases hyperhomocysteinemia, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and liver injury in alcohol-fed mice. *Gastroenterology* 124 (5): 1488–99. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-5085(03)00276-2>.
[]: Joncquel-Chevalier Curt, Marie, Pia-Manuela Voicu, Monique Fontaine, Anne-Frédérique Dessein, Nicole Porchet, Karine Mention-Mulliez, Dries Dobbelaere, Gustavo Soto-Ares, David Cheillan, and Joseph Vamecq. 2015. Creatine biosynthesis and transport in health and disease. *Biochimie* 119 (December): 146–65. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2015.10.022>.
[]: Jong, W.J. de, A.M. Cleveringa, B. Greijdanus, P. Meyer, E. Heineman, and J.B. Hulscher. 2015. The effect of acute alcohol intoxication on gut wall integrity in healthy male volunteers; a randomized controlled trial. *Alcohol* 49 (1): 65–70. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2014.09.033>.
[]: Jung, Young Suk, Sun Ju Kim, Do Young Kwon, Chul Won Ahn, Young Soon Kim, Dal Woong Choi, and Young Chul Kim. 2013. Alleviation of alcoholic liver injury by betaine involves an enhancement of antioxidant defense via regulation of sulfur amino acid metabolism. *Food and Chemical Toxicology* 62 (December): 292–98. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2013.08.049>.
[]: Kaplan, Joshua S., Claudia Mohr, and David J. Rossi. 2013. Opposite actions of alcohol on tonic GABAA receptor currents mediated by nNOS and PKC activity. *Nature Neuroscience* 16 (12): 1783–93. <https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3559>.
[]: Karadayian, Analía G., and Rodolfo A. Cutrera. 2013. Alcohol hangover: Type and time-extension of motor function impairments. *Behavioural Brain Research* 247 (June): 165–73. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2013.03.037>.
[]: Karadayian, Analía G., Silvia Lores-Arnaiz, and Rodolfo A. Cutrera. 2014. The effect of constant darkness and circadian resynchronization on the recovery of alcohol hangover. *Behavioural Brain Research* 268 (July): 94–103. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2014.03.048>.
[]: Kharbanda, Kusum K., Mark E. Mailliard, Cheryl R. Baldwin, Harriet C. Beckenhauer, Michael F. Sorrell, and Dean J. Tuma. 2007. Betaine attenuates alcoholic steatosis by restoring phosphatidylcholine generation via the phosphatidylethanolamine methyltransferase pathway. *Journal of Hepatology* 46 (2): 314–21. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2006.08.024>.
[]: Kharbanda, Kusum K., Mark E. Mailliard, Cheryl R. Baldwin, Michael F. Sorrell, and Dean J. Tuma. 2007. Accumulation of proteins bearing atypical isoaspartyl residues in livers of alcohol-fed rats is prevented by betaine administration: Effects on protein-l-isoaspartyl methyltransferase activity. *Journal of Hepatology* 46 (6): 1119–25. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2007.01.026>.
[]: Kharbanda, Kusum K., David D. Rogers, Mark E. Mailliard, Gerri L. Siford, Anthony J. Barak, Harriet C. Beckenhauer, Michael F. Sorrell, and Dean J. Tuma. 2005. A Comparison of the Effects of Betaine and S-Adenosylmethionine on Ethanol-Induced Changes in Methionine Metabolism and Steatosis in Rat Hepatocytes. *The Journal of Nutrition* 135 (3): 519–24. <http://jn.nutrition.org/content/135/3/519>.
[]: Kim, Dai-Jin, Won Kim, Su-Jung Yoon, Bo-Moon Choi, Jung-Soo Kim, Hyo Jin Go, Yong-Ku Kim, and Jaeseung Jeong. 2003. Effects of alcohol hangover on cytokine production in healthy subjects. *Alcohol* 31 (3): 167–70. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2003.09.003>.
[]: Kim, Mi Jin, Saroj Nepal, Eung-Seok Lee, Tae Cheon Jeong, Sang-Hyun Kim, and Pil-Hoon Park. 2013. Ethanol increases matrix metalloproteinase-12 expression via NADPH oxidase-dependent ROS production in macrophages. *Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology* 273 (1): 77–89. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2013.08.005>.
[]: King, Andrea, Geetha Munisamy, Harriet de Wit, and Shang Lin. 2006. Attenuated cortisol response to alcohol in heavy social drinkers. *International Journal of Psychophysiology* 59 (3): 203–9. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2005.10.008>.
[]: Kokubo, Takeshi, Emiko Ikeshima, Takayoshi Kirisako, Yutaka Miura, Masahisa Horiuchi, and Akira Tsuda. 2013. A randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled crossover trial on the effects of L-ornithine on salivary cortisol and feelings of fatigue of flushers the morning after alcohol consumption. *Biopsychosocial Medicine* 7 (February): 6. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1751-0759-7-6>.
[]: Kraemer, William J., Jeff S. Volek, and Courtenay Dunn-Lewis. 2008. L-carnitine supplementation: influence upon physiological function. *Current sports medicine reports* 7 (4): 218–223. <http://journals.lww.com/acsm-csmr/Abstract/2008/07000/L_Carnitine_Supplementation__Influence_upon.11.aspx>.
[]: Krass, M. 2008. Antidepressant-like effect of agmatine is not mediated by serotonin. *Behavioural Brain Research* 188 (2): 324–28. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2007.11.013>.
[]: Kruisselbrink, L. Darren, Katrina L. Martin, Michael Megeney, Jonathon R. Fowles, and René JL Murphy. 2006. Physical and psychomotor functioning of females the morning after consuming low to moderate quantities of beer. *Journal of studies on alcohol* 67 (3): 416–420. <http://www.jsad.com/doi/abs/10.15288/jsa.2006.67.416>.
[]: Ku, Bo Mi, Yeon Joo, Jihye Mun, Gu Seub Roh, Sang Soo Kang, Gyeong Jae Cho, Wan Sung Choi, and Hyun Joon Kim. 2006. Heme oxygenase protects hippocampal neurons from ethanol-induced neurotoxicity. *Neuroscience Letters* 405 (3): 168–71. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2006.06.052>.
[._2007]: Ku, Bo Mi, Yeon Kyung Lee, Joo Yeon Jeong, Jihye Mun, Jae Yoon Han, Gu Seob Roh, Hyun Joon Kim, et al. 2007. Ethanol-induced oxidative stress is mediated by p38 MAPK pathway in mouse hippocampal cells. *Neuroscience Letters* 419 (1): 64–67. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2007.03.049>.
[]: Kuo, Yung-Ting, Ting-Han Lin, Wei-Lu Chen, and Horng-Mo Lee. 2012. Alpha-lipoic acid induces adipose triglyceride lipase expression and decreases intracellular lipid accumulation in HepG2 cells. *European Journal of Pharmacology* 692 (1): 10–18. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2012.07.028>.
[]: Kwon, Oh-Seung, and Youn Bok Chung. 2004. HPLC determination and pharmacokinetics of endogenous acetyl-L-carnitine (ALC) in human volunteers orally administered a single dose of ALC. *Archives of pharmacal research* 27 (6): 676–681. <http://www.springerlink.com/index/7X8L626835633264.pdf>.
[]: Lambert, Jason C., Zhanxiang Zhou, Lipeng Wang, Zhenyuan Song, Craig J. Mcclain, and Y. James Kang. 2003. Prevention of Alterations in Intestinal Permeability Is Involved in Zinc Inhibition of Acute Ethanol-Induced Liver Damage in Mice. *Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics* 305 (3): 880–86. <https://doi.org/10.1124/jpet.102.047852>.
[]: Lane, Darius J. R., Sherin Chikhani, Vera Richardson, and Des R. Richardson. 2013. Transferrin iron uptake is stimulated by ascorbate via an intracellular reductive mechanism. *Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Cell Research* 1833 (6): 1527–41. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.02.010>.
[]: Lanz, Bernard, Kai Uffmann, Matthias T. Wyss, Bruno Weber, Alfred Buck, and Rolf Gruetter. 2012. A two-compartment mathematical model of neuroglial metabolism using [1-11C] acetate. *Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism* 32 (3): 548. <https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2011.162>.
[]: Ledesma, Juan Carlos, and Carlos M. G. Aragon. 2012. Alpha-lipoic acid, a scavenging agent for H2O2, reduces ethanol-stimulated locomotion in mice. *Psychopharmacology* 219 (1): 171–80. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-011-2407-0>.
[]: Ledesma, Juan Carlos, and Carlos M. G. Aragon. 2013. Acquisition and reconditioning of ethanol-induced conditioned place preference in mice is blocked by the H2O2 scavenger alpha lipoic acid. *Psychopharmacology* 226 (4): 673–85. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-012-2831-9>.
[]: Lee, Hae-In, Robin A. McGregor, Myung-Sook Choi, Kown-Il Seo, Un Ju Jung, Jiyoung Yeo, Myung-Joo Kim, and Mi-Kyung Lee. 2013. Low doses of curcumin protect alcohol-induced liver damage by modulation of the alcohol metabolic pathway, CYP2E1 and AMPK. *Life Sciences* 93 (18–19): 693–99. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2013.09.014>.
[]: Lee, Ho-Sun, Toyohi Isse, Toshihiro Kawamoto, Hyun Wook Baik, Jong Y. Park, and Mihi Yang. 2013. Effect of Korean pear (Pyruspyrifolia cv. Shingo) juice on hangover severity following alcohol consumption. *Food and Chemical Toxicology* 58 (August): 101–6. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2013.04.007>.
[]: Lee, Mi-Hyang, Jung Hyun Kwak, Gayoung Jeon, Jong-Won Lee, Jang-Ho Seo, Hoon-Sang Lee, and Jong Ho Lee. 2014. Red ginseng relieves the effects of alcohol consumption and hangover symptoms in healthy men: a randomized crossover study. *Food & Function* 5 (3): 528. <https://doi.org/10.1039/c3fo60481k>.
[]: Lee, Seo Yeon, and Kwang Suk Ko. 2016. Effects of S-Adenosylmethionine and Its Combinations With Taurine and/or Betaine on Glutathione Homeostasis in Ethanol-induced Acute Hepatotoxicity. *Journal of Cancer Prevention* 21 (3): 164–72. <https://doi.org/10.15430/JCP.2016.21.3.164>.
[]: Lenders, C. M., S. Liu, D. W. Wilmore, L. Sampson, L. W. Dougherty, D. Spiegelman, and W. C. Willett. 2009. Evaluation of a novel food composition database that includes glutamine and other amino acids derived from gene sequencing data. *European journal of clinical nutrition* 63 (12): 1433–1439. <http://www.nature.com/ejcn/journal/v63/n12/abs/ejcn2009110a.html>.
[]: Leung, Tung-Ming, and Natalia Nieto. 2013. CYP2E1 and oxidant stress in alcoholic and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. *Journal of Hepatology* 58 (2): 395–98. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2012.08.018>.
[]: Lippi, Giuseppe, Camilla Mattiuzzi, and Massimo Franchini. 2015. Alcohol consumption and venous thromboembolism: friend or foe? *Internal and Emergency Medicine* 10 (8): 907–13. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11739-015-1327-0>.
[]: Loo, Van De, A. J. A. E, A. Hogewoning, S. J. Raasveld, R. de Zeeuw, E. R. Bosma, N. H. Bouwmeester, et al. 2015. FOC7-2SALIVA CYTOKINE CONCENTRATIONS THE DAY AFTER HEAVY ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION IN DRINKERS SUFFERING FROM A HANGOVER VERSUS THOSE WHO CLAIM TO BE HANGOVER RESISTANT. *Alcohol and Alcoholism* 50 (suppl_1): i43–i43. <https://doi.org/10.1093/alcalc/agv079.29>.
[]: Lu, Yongke, and Arthur I. Cederbaum. 2008. CYP2E1 and oxidative liver injury by alcohol. *Free Radical Biology and Medicine* 44 (5): 723–38. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2007.11.004>.
[]: M, Yue, Ni Q, Yu Ch, Ren Km, Chen Wx, and Li Ym. 2006. Transient elevation of hepatic enzymes in volunteers after intake of alcohol. *Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int* 5 (1): 52–55. <http://www.hbpdint.com/CN/abstract/abstract3383.shtml>.
[]: Malaguarnera, Michele. 2013. Acetyl-L-carnitine in hepatic encephalopathy. *Metabolic Brain Disease* 28 (2): 193–99. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-013-9376-4>.
[]: Malaguarnera, Michele, Marco Vacante, Maria Giordano, Giovanni Pennisi, Rita Bella, Liborio Rampello, Mariano Malaguarnera, Giovanni Li Volti, and Fabio Galvano. 2011. Oral acetyl-l-carnitine therapy reduces fatigue in overt hepatic encephalopathy: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. *The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition* 93 (4): 799–808. <https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.110.007393>.
[]: Mandrekar, Pranoti, Donna Catalano, Valentina Jeliazkova, and Karen Kodys. 2008. Alcohol exposure regulates heat shock transcription factor binding and heat shock proteins 70 and 90 in monocytes and macrophages: implication for TNF-α regulation. *Journal of Leukocyte Biology* 84 (5): 1335–45. <https://doi.org/10.1189/jlb.0407256>.
[]: MARCOVINA, SANTICA M., CESARE SIRTORI, ANDREA PERACINO, MIHAI GHEORGHIADE, PEGGY BORUM, GIUSEPPE REMUZZI, and HOSSEIN ARDEHALI. 2013. Translating the basic knowledge of mitochondrial functions to metabolic therapy: role of L-carnitine. *Translational research : the journal of laboratory and clinical medicine* 161 (2): 73–84. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trsl.2012.10.006>.
[]: Martinotti, Giovanni, Sara Andreoli, Daniela Reina, Marco Di Nicola, Ilaria Ortolani, Daniela Tedeschi, Fabrizio Fanella, et al. 2011. Acetyl-l-Carnitine in the treatment of anhedonia, melancholic and negative symptoms in alcohol dependent subjects. *Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, Suicide and suicidal behavior* 35 (4): 953–58. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2011.01.013>.
[]: Martinotti, Giovanni, Daniela Reina, Marco Di Nicola, Sara Andreoli, Daniela Tedeschi, Ilaria Ortolani, Gino Pozzi, Emerenziana Iannoni, Stefania D’Iddio, and Luigi Janiri. 2010. Acetyl-l-Carnitine for Alcohol Craving and Relapse Prevention in Anhedonic Alcoholics: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Pilot Trial. *Alcohol and Alcoholism* 45 (5): 449–55. <https://doi.org/10.1093/alcalc/agq039>.
[]: Matsukura, Takefumi, Tamiko Takahashi, Yasuhiro Nishimura, Masahiro Takaya, and Hajime Fujimura. 1993. Crystalline l-carnosine zinc complex and production thereof. US4981846, filed August 1, 1988, and issued February 10, 1993. <http://www.google.com/patents/EP0303380B1>US4981846.
[]: Mazur, Andrzej, Jeanette A. M. Maier, Edmond Rock, Elyett Gueux, Wojciech Nowacki, and Yves Rayssiguier. 2007. Magnesium and the inflammatory response: Potential physiopathological implications. *Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics*, Highlight Issue on Cellular Regulation of Magnesium, 458 (1): 48–56. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2006.03.031>.
[]: McCrae, Jame C., Noel Sharkey, David J. Webb, A. D. Bastiaan Vliegenthart, and James W. Dear. 2016. Ethanol consumption produces a small increase in circulating miR-122 in healthy individuals. *Clinical Toxicology* 54 (1): 53–55. <https://doi.org/10.3109/15563650.2015.1112015>.
[^McGregorPuerarialobataKudzu2007]: McGregor, Neil R. 2007. Pueraria lobata (Kudzu root) hangover remedies and acetaldehyde-associated neoplasm risk. *Alcohol* 41 (7): 469–78. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2007.07.009>.
[^MirOccludindeficiencypromotes2016]: Mir, Hina, Avtar S. Meena, Kamaljit K. Chaudhry, Pradeep K. Shukla, Ruchika Gangwar, Bhargavi Manda, Mythili K. Padala, et al. 2016. Occludin deficiency promotes ethanol-induced disruption of colonic epithelial junctions, gut barrier dysfunction and liver damage in mice. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - General Subjects* 1860 (4): 765–74. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.12.013>.
[^mishra_downregulation_2011]: Mishra, Amartya, Sumit Paul, and Snehasikta Swarnakar. 2011. Downregulation of matrix metalloproteinase-9 by melatonin during prevention of alcohol-induced liver injury in mice. *Biochimie* 93 (5): 854–66. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2011.02.007>.
[^modi_brain_2011]: Modi, Shilpi, Manisha Bhattacharya, Pawan Kumar, Smita N. Deshpande, Rajendra Prasad Tripathi, and Subash Khushu. 2011. Brain metabolite changes in alcoholism: Localized proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy study of the occipital lobe. *European Journal of Radiology* 79 (1): 96–100. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejrad.2009.11.003>.
[^MoiniRaLipoicAcidAction2002]: Moini, Hadi, Oren Tirosh, Young Chul Park, Kyung-Joo Cho, and Lester Packer. 2002. R-α-Lipoic Acid Action on Cell Redox Status, the Insulin Receptor, and Glucose Uptake in 3T3-L1 Adipocytes. *Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics* 397 (2): 384–91. <https://doi.org/10.1006/abbi.2001.2680>.
[^molderings_agmatine_2012]: Molderings, Gerhard J., and Britta Haenisch. 2012. Agmatine (decarboxylated L-arginine): physiological role and therapeutic potential. *Pharmacology & Therapeutics* 133 (3): 351–65. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2011.12.005>.
[^morris_alcohol_2015]: Morris, Niya L., Jill A. Ippolito, Brenda J. Curtis, Michael M. Chen, Scott L. Friedman, Ian N. Hines, Gorges E. Haddad, et al. 2015. Alcohol and Inflammatory Responses: Summary of the 2013 Alcohol and Immunology Research Interest Group (AIRIG) meeting. *Alcohol* 49 (1): 1–6. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2014.07.018>.
[^MudrakovaPostprandialtriglyceridemiasingle2013]: Mudráková, E., R. Poledne, and J. Kovář. 2013. Postprandial triglyceridemia after single dose of alcohol in healthy young men. *Nutrition, Metabolism and Cardiovascular Diseases* 23 (3): 183–88. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.numecd.2011.05.003>.
[^MumtazRoleNacetylcysteineadults2009]: Mumtaz, Khalid, Zahid Azam, Saeed Hamid, Shahab Abid, Sadik Memon, Hasnain Ali Shah, and Wasim Jafri. 2009. Role of N-acetylcysteine in adults with non-acetaminophen-induced acute liver failure in a center without the facility of liver transplantation. *Hepatology International* 3 (4): 563. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s12072-009-9151-0>.
[^muneer_ethanol_2011]: Muneer, P M Abdul, Saleena Alikunju, Adam M Szlachetka, Aaron J Mercer, and James Haorah. 2011. Ethanol impairs glucose uptake by human astrocytes and neurons: protective effects of acetyl-L-carnitine. *International Journal of Physiology, Pathophysiology and Pharmacology* 3 (1): 48–56. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3023411/>.
[^MurphyHowserotoninstory2008]: Murphy, Dennis L., Meredith A. Fox, Kiara R. Timpano, Pablo R. Moya, Renee Ren-Patterson, Anne M. Andrews, Andrew Holmes, Klaus-Peter Lesch, and Jens R. Wendland. 2008. How the serotonin story is being rewritten by new gene-based discoveries principally related to SLC6A4, the serotonin transporter gene, which functions to influence all cellular serotonin systems. *Neuropharmacology* 55 (6): 932–60. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2008.08.034>.
[^nalecz_carnitine_2004]: Nałęcz, Katarzyna A., Dorota Miecz, Vincent Berezowski, and Roméo Cecchelli. 2004. Carnitine: transport and physiological functions in the brain. *Molecular Aspects of Medicine*, Carnitine, 25 (5): 551–67. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mam.2004.06.001>.
[^navder_dilinoleoylphosphatidylcholine_2002]: Navder, Khursheed P., and Charles S. Lieber. 2002. Dilinoleoylphosphatidylcholine Is Responsible for the Beneficial Effects of Polyenylphosphatidylcholine on Ethanol-Induced Mitochondrial Injury in Rats. *Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications* 291 (4): 1109–12. <https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2002.6557>.
[^needham_aspirin_1971]: Needham, C. D., J. Kyle, P. F. Jones, S. J. Johnston, and D. F. Kerridge. 1971. Aspirin and alcohol in gastrointestinal haemorrhage. *Gut* 12 (10): 819–821. <http://gut.bmj.com/content/12/10/819.abstract>.
[^NeisTherapeuticpotentialagmatine2017]: Neis, Vivian B., Priscila B. Rosa, Gislaine Olescowicz, and Ana Lúcia S. Rodrigues. 2017. Therapeutic potential of agmatine for CNS disorders. *Neurochemistry International*, May. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuint.2017.05.006>.
[^neupane_cytokine_2016]: Neupane, Sudan Prasad, Andreas Skulberg, Knut Ragnvald Skulberg, Hans Christian D. Aass, and Jørgen G. Bramness. 2016. Cytokine Changes following Acute Ethanol Intoxication in Healthy Men: A Crossover Study. *Mediators of Inflammation* 2016. <https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/3758590>.
[^OldeDaminkInterorganammoniametabolism2002]: Olde Damink, Steven W. M., Nicolaas E. P. Deutz, Cornelis H. C. Dejong, Peter B. Soeters, and Rajiv Jalan. 2002. Interorgan ammonia metabolism in liver failure. *Neurochemistry International*, The Neurochemistry of Ammonia, 41 (2): 177–88. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0197-0186(02)00040-2>.
[^deOliveiraQuercetinmitochondriamechanistic2016]: Oliveira, Marcos Roberto de, Seyed Mohammad Nabavi, Nady Braidy, William N. Setzer, Touqeer Ahmed, and Seyed Fazel Nabavi. 2016. Quercetin and the mitochondria: A mechanistic view. *Biotechnology Advances* 34 (5): 532–49. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2015.12.014>.
[^oshima_alanine-fortified_2016]: Oshima, Shunji, Sachie Shiiya, Yoshimi Tokumaru, and Tomomasa Kanda. 2016. Alanine-fortified tomatoes relieve the acute alcohol-induced adverse effects in healthy men: a randomized cross-over study. *Nutrition & Metabolism* 13 (April). <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12986-016-0087-9>.
[^osna_aberrant_2016]: Osna, Natalia A, Wayne G Carter, Murali Ganesan, Irina A Kirpich, Craig J McClain, Dennis R Petersen, Colin T Shearn, Maria L Tomasi, and Kusum K Kharbanda. 2016. Aberrant post-translational protein modifications in the pathogenesis of alcohol-induced liver injury. *World Journal of Gastroenterology* 22 (27): 6192–6200. <https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v22.i27.6192>.
[^OsnaProlongedfeedingguanidinoacetate2016]: Osna, Natalia A, Dan Feng, Murali Ganesan, Priya F Maillacheruvu, David J Orlicky, Samuel W French, Dean J Tuma, and Kusum K Kharbanda. 2016. Prolonged feeding with guanidinoacetate, a methyl group consumer, exacerbates ethanol-induced liver injury. *World Journal of Gastroenterology* 22 (38): 8497–8508. <https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v22.i38.8497>.
[^OvermanPolyphenolrichgrapepowder2010]: Overman, A., A. Bumrungpert, A. Kennedy, K. Martinez, C.-C. Chuang, T. West, B. Dawson, W. Jia, and M. McIntosh. 2010. Polyphenol-rich grape powder extract (GPE) attenuates inflammation in human macrophages and in human adipocytes exposed to macrophage-conditioned media. *International Journal of Obesity* 34 (5): 800–808. <https://doi.org/10.1038/ijo.2009.296>.
[^pascual_cytokines_2015]: Pascual, María, Pablo Baliño, Carlos M. G. Aragón, and Consuelo Guerri. 2015. Cytokines and chemokines as biomarkers of ethanol-induced neuroinflammation and anxiety-related behavior: Role of TLR4 and TLR2. *Neuropharmacology* 89 (February): 352–59. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2014.10.014>.
[^patel_altered_2002]: Patel, Vinood B., and Carol C. Cunningham. 2002. Altered Hepatic Mitochondrial Ribosome Structure Following Chronic Ethanol Consumption. *Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics* 398 (1): 41–50. <https://doi.org/10.1006/abbi.2001.2701>.
[^peana_effect_2012]: Peana, Alessandra T., Giulia Muggironi, Giulia R. Fois, Manuel Zinellu, Donatella Sirca, and Marco Diana. 2012. Effect of l-cysteine on acetaldehyde self-administration. *Alcohol* 46 (5): 489–97. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2011.10.004>.
[^PekalaLCarnitineMetabolicFunctions2011]: Pekala, Jolanta, Bozena Patkowska-Sokola, Robert Bodkowski, Dorota Jamroz, Piotr Nowakowski, Stanislaw Lochynski, and Tadeusz Librowski. 2011. L-Carnitine - Metabolic Functions and Meaning in Humans Life. *Current Drug Metabolism* 12 (7): 667–78. <https://doi.org/10.2174/138920011796504536>.
[^penning_alcohol_2012]: Penning, Renske, Adele McKinney, and Joris C. Verster. 2012. Alcohol Hangover Symptoms and Their Contribution to the Overall Hangover Severity. *Alcohol and Alcoholism* 47 (3): 248–52. <https://doi.org/10.1093/alcalc/ags029>.
[^PiaseckiHangoverRiskAlcohol2010]: Piasecki, Thomas M., Brandon M. Robertson, and Amee J. Epler. 2010. Hangover and Risk for Alcohol Use Disorders: Existing Evidence and Potential Mechanisms. *Current drug abuse reviews* 3 (2): 92–102. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4264051/>.
[^PittlerInterventionspreventingtreating2005]: Pittler, Max H, Joris C Verster, and Edzard Ernst. 2005. Interventions for preventing or treating alcohol hangover: systematic review of randomised controlled trials. BMJ : British Medical Journal* 331 (7531): 1515–18. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1322250/>.
[^pittler_effectiveness_2003]: Pittler, Max H., Adrian R. White, Clare Stevinson, and Edzard Ernst. 2003. Effectiveness of artichoke extract in preventing alcohol-induced hangovers: a randomized controlled trial. *CMAJ: Canadian Medical Association Journal* 169 (12): 1269–73. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC280580/>.
[^PratNeurocognitiveeffectsalcohol2008]: Prat, Gemma, Ana Adan, Montserrat Pérez-Pàmies, and Miquel Sànchez-Turet. 2008. Neurocognitive effects of alcohol hangover. *Addictive Behaviors* 33 (1): 15–23. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2007.05.002>.
[^purohit_alcohol_2008]: Purohit, Vishnudutt, J. Christian Bode, Christiane Bode, David A. Brenner, Mashkoor A. Choudhry, Frank Hamilton, Y. James Kang, et al. 2008. Alcohol, Intestinal Bacterial Growth, Intestinal Permeability to Endotoxin, and Medical Consequences. *Alcohol* 42 (5): 349–61. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2008.03.131>.
[]: Rae, Caroline D. 2014. A Guide to the Metabolic Pathways and Function of Metabolites Observed in Human Brain 1H Magnetic Resonance Spectra. *Neurochemical Research* 39 (1): 1–36. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-013-1199-5>.
[]: Rahimipour, Marzieh, Ali Reza Talebi, Morteza Anvari, Abolghasem Abbasi Sarcheshmeh, and Marjan Omidi. 2013. Effects of different doses of ethanol on sperm parameters, chromatin structure and apoptosis in adult mice. *European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology* 170 (2): 423–28. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejogrb.2013.06.038>.
[]: Rajamani, Rathinam, Arumugam Muthuvel, Sundaramahalingam Manikandan, Ramasundaram Srikumar, and Rathinasamy Sheeladevi. 2007. Efficacy of dl-α-lipoic acid on methanol induced free radical changes, protein oxidative damages and hsp70 expression in folate deficient rat nervous tissue. *Chemico-Biological Interactions* 167 (3): 161–67. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbi.2007.01.019>.
[]: Ramaekers, Johannes G., Eef L. Theunissen, Marjolein de Brouwer, Stefan W. Toennes, Manfred R. Moeller, and Gerhold Kauert. 2011. Tolerance and cross-tolerance to neurocognitive effects of THC and alcohol in heavy cannabis users. *Psychopharmacology* 214 (2): 391–401. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-010-2042-1>.
[]: Rebouche, Charles J. 2004. Kinetics, Pharmacokinetics, and Regulation of l-Carnitine and Acetyl-l-carnitine Metabolism. *Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences* 1033 (1): 30–41. <https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1320.003>.
[]: Reischl, Roland J., Wolfgang Bicker, Thomas Keller, Günther Lamprecht, and Wolfgang Lindner. 2012. Occurrence of 2-methylthiazolidine-4-carboxylic acid, a condensation product of cysteine and acetaldehyde, in human blood as a consequence of ethanol consumption. *Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry* 404 (6–7): 1779–87. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-012-6255-5>.
[]: 2002. *Oncogene* 21 (10). <https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1205023>.
[]: Rohsenow, Damaris J., Jonathan Howland, Sara J. Minsky, Jacey Greece, Alissa Almeida, and Timothy A. Roehrs. 2007. The Acute Hangover Scale: A New Measure of Immediate Hangover Symptoms. *Addictive Behaviors* 32 (6): 1314–20. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2006.10.001>.
[]: Romani, Andrea M. P. 2015. Effect of acute and prolonged alcohol administration on Mg2+ homeostasis in cardiac cells. *Alcohol* 49 (3): 265–73. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2015.02.002>.
[ómez_Funuyet_Murillo_Carreras_2014]: Rua, Rui M., Mª. Luisa Ojeda, Fátima Nogales, Jose Maria Rubio, Manuel Romero-Gómez, Jorge Funuyet, Mª. Luisa Murillo, and Olimpia Carreras. 2014. Serum selenium levels and oxidative balance as differential markers in hepatic damage caused by alcohol. *Life Sciences* 94 (2): 158–63. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2013.10.008>.
[._2010]: Rump, Travis J., P.M. Abdul Muneer, Adam M. Szlachetka, Allyson Lamb, Catherine Haorei, Saleena Alikunju, Huangui Xiong, et al. 2010. Acetyl-L-carnitine protects neuronal function from alcohol-induced oxidative damage in the brain. *Free radical biology & medicine* 49 (10): 1494–1504. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.08.011>.
[]: Samuni, Yuval, Sara Goldstein, Olivia M. Dean, and Michael Berk. 2013. The chemistry and biological activities of N-acetylcysteine. *Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - General Subjects* 1830 (8): 4117–29. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.04.016>.
[]: Scheer, Marc A., Katrina J. Schneider, Rochelle L. Finnigan, Eamon P. Maloney, Mark A. Wells, and Dahn L. Clemens. 2016. The Involvement of Acetaldehyde in Ethanol-Induced Cell Cycle Impairment. *Biomolecules* 6 (2). <https://doi.org/10.3390/biom6020017>.
[]: Seiva, Fábio Rodrigues Ferreira, Juliana Fujihara Amauchi, Katiucha Karolina Ribeiro Rocha, Geovana Xavier Ebaid, Gisele Souza, Ana Angélica Henrique Fernandes, Ana Catarina Cataneo, and Ethel Lourenzi Barbosa Novelli. 2009. Alcoholism and alcohol abstinence: N-acetylcysteine to improve energy expenditure, myocardial oxidative stress, and energy metabolism in alcoholic heart disease. *Alcohol* 43 (8): 649–56. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2009.09.028>.
[]: Seo, Hyun-Ju, Kyu-Shik Jeong, Mi-Kyung Lee, Yong Bok Park, Un Ju Jung, Hye-Jin Kim, and Myung-Sook Choi. 2003. Role of naringin supplement in regulation of lipid and ethanol metabolism in rats. *Life Sciences* 73 (7): 933–46. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0024-3205(03)00358-8>.
[]: Seo, Jong Bae, G. A. Nagana Gowda, and Duk-Su Koh. 2013. Apoptotic Damage of Pancreatic Ductal Epithelia by Alcohol and Its Rescue by an Antioxidant. *PLoS ONE* 8 (11). <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0081893>.
[]: Sharma, Praveen, and Barjesh Chander Sharma. 2013. Disaccharides in the treatment of hepatic encephalopathy. *Metabolic Brain Disease* 28 (2): 313–20. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-013-9392-4>.
[]: Shay, Kate Petersen, Régis F. Moreau, Eric J. Smith, Anthony R. Smith, and Tory M. Hagen. 2009. Alpha-lipoic acid as a dietary supplement: Molecular mechanisms and therapeutic potential. *Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - General Subjects}, Includes Special Section: Biochemical and Molecular Mechanisms of Aging: from Model Systems to Human Longevity*, 1790 (10): 1149–60. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2009.07.026>.
[]: Shi, Peiying, Bing Chen, Conghai Chen, Jingyang Xu, Zhenhuang Shen, Xiaoqing Miao, and Hong Yao. 2015. Honey reduces blood alcohol concentration but not affects the level of serum MDA and GSH-Px activity in intoxicated male mice models. *BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine* 15 (July): 225. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12906-015-0766-5>.
[._2006]: Shi, Yufang, Catherine H. Liu, Arthur I. Roberts, Jyoti Das, Guangwu Xu, Guangwen Ren, Yingyu Zhang, et al. 2006. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and T-cell responses: what we do and don’t know. *Cell Research* 16 (2): 126–33. <https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cr.7310017>.
[]: Shibata, Katsumi, Tsutomu Fukuwatari, Saori Higashiyama, Chisa Sugita, Isao Azumano, and Masaaki Onda. 2013. Pantothenic acid refeeding diminishes the liver, perinephrical fats, and plasma fats accumulated by pantothenic acid deficiency and/or ethanol consumption. *Nutrition* 29 (5): 796–801. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nut.2013.01.002>.
[]: Shulga, Nataly, and John G. Pastorino. 2014. Mitoneet mediates TNFα-induced necroptosis promoted by exposure to fructose and ethanol. *Journal of Cell Science* 127 (4): 896–907. <https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.140764>.
[._V._K.N._2017]: Sivashanmugam, Muthukumaran, Jaidev J., Umashankar V., and Sulochana K.N. 2017. Ornithine and its role in metabolic diseases: An appraisal. *Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy* 86 (February): 185–94. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2016.12.024>.
[. Stephens_Constantin-Teodosiu_Greenhaff_2007]: Stephens, Francis B., Dumitru Constantin-Teodosiu, and Paul L. Greenhaff. 2007. New insights concerning the role of carnitine in the regulation of fuel metabolism in skeletal muscle: Carnitine metabolism in skeletal muscle. *The Journal of Physiology* 581 (2): 431–44. <https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2006.125799>.
[. Stephens_Ling_Heffernan_Heather_Jones_2008]: Stephens, R., J. Ling, T. M. Heffernan, N. Heather, and K. Jones. 2008. A review of the literature on the cognitive effects of alcohol hangover. *Alcohol and Alcoholism* 43 (2): 163–70. <https://doi.org/10.1093/alcalc/agm160>.
[árez_Bodega_Fernández_2002]: Suárez, I., G. Bodega, and B. Fernández. 2002. Glutamine synthetase in brain: effect of ammonia. *Neurochemistry International*, The Neurochemistry of Ammonia, 41 (2–3): 123–42. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0197-0186(02)00033-5>.
[]: Sugino, Tomohiro, Tomoko Shirai, Yoshitaka Kajimoto, and Osami Kajimoto. 2008. l-Ornithine supplementation attenuates physical fatigue in healthy volunteers by modulating lipid and amino acid metabolism. *Nutrition Research* 28 (11): 738–43. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nutres.2008.08.008>.
[]: Sumida, Ken D., Suzanne C. Crandall, Puja L. Chadha, and Tauseef Qureshi. 2005. Differential effects of alcohol upon gluconeogenesis from lactate in young and old hepatocytes. *Experimental Gerontology* 40 (4): 324–29. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exger.2005.01.005>.
[]: Suzuki, Takuya, and Hiroshi Hara. 2011. Role of flavonoids in intestinal tight junction regulation. *Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry* 22 (5): 401–8. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnutbio.2010.08.001>.
[]: Szabo, Gyongyi, and Banishree Saha. 2015. Alcohol’s Effect on Host Defense. *Alcohol Research : Current Reviews* 37 (2): 159–70. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4590613/>.
[]: Taes, Youri E. C., Evy Bruggeman, Joachim Bleys, and Joris R. Delanghe. 2007. Lowering methylation demand by creatine supplementation paradoxically decreases DNA methylation. *Molecular Genetics and Metabolism* 92 (3): 283–84. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.06.019>.
[]: Taksande, Brijesh G, Nandkishor R Kotagale, Mital R Patel, Gajanan P Shelkar, Rajesh R Ugale, and Chandrabhan T Chopde. 2010. Agmatine, an endogenous imidazoline receptor ligand modulates ethanol anxiolysis and withdrawal anxiety in rats. *European Journal of Pharmacology* 637 (1–3): 89–101. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.03.058>.
[]: Tang, Yueming, Christopher B. Forsyth, Ashkan Farhadi, Jayanthi Rangan, Shriram Jakate, Maliha Shaikh, Ali Banan, Jeremy Z. Fields, and Ali Keshavarzian. 2009. Nitric oxide mediated intestinal injury is required for alcohol-induced gut leakiness and liver damage. *Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research* 33 (7): 1220–30. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.00946.x>.
[ño_Aragon_2014]: Tarragon, E., P. Baliño, and C. M. G. Aragon. 2014. Centrally formed acetaldehyde mediates ethanol-induced brain PKA activation. *Neuroscience Letters* 580 (September): 68–73. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2014.07.046>.
[]: Thakur, Pallavi, Raman Chawla, Alka Narula, and Rakesh Kumar Sharma. 2017. Protective effect of Berberis aristata against peritonitis induced by carbapenem-resistant Escherichia coli in a mammalian model. *Journal of Global Antimicrobial Resistance* 9 (June): 21–29. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jgar.2016.12.018>.
[]: Thieden, Herluf ID, Niels Grunnet, Stig E. Damgaard, and Leif Sestoft. 1972. Effect of fructose and glyceraldehyde on ethanol metabolism in human liver and in rat liver. *The FEBS Journal* 30 (2): 250–261. <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1972.tb02093.x/full>.
[]: Tuma, Dean J. 2002. Role of malondialdehyde-acetaldehyde adducts in liver injury 1, 2. *Free Radical Biology and Medicine* 32 (4): 303–308. <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0891584901007420>.
[]: Tunc-Skarka, Nuran, Wolfgang Weber-Fahr, and Gabriele Ende. 2015. Recreational alcohol use induces changes in the concentrations of choline-containing compounds and total creatine in the brain: a 1H MRS study of healthy subjects. *Magnetic Resonance Materials in Physics, Biology and Medicine* 28 (5): 503–10. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10334-015-0486-3>.
[]: Uemura, Takeshi, Yuka Tanaka, Kyohei Higashi, Daisuke Miyamori, Tomokazu Takasaka, Tatsuo Nagano, Toshihiko Toida, Kanji Yoshimoto, Kazuei Igarashi, and Hiroshi Ikegaya. 2013. Acetaldehyde-induced cytotoxicity involves induction of spermine oxidase at the transcriptional level. *Toxicology* 310 (August): 1–7. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2013.05.008>.
[]: Uzbay, Tayfun, Gokhan Goktalay, Hakan Kayir, Salih S. Eker, Asli Sarandol, Sema Oral, Levent Buyukuysal, Gokhan Ulusoy, and Selcuk Kirli. 2013. Increased plasma agmatine levels in patients with schizophrenia. *Journal of Psychiatric Research* 47 (8): 1054–60. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.04.004>.
[érez-Matute_González-Muniesa_Prieto-Hontoria_Moreno-Aliaga_Martínez_2012]: Valdecantos, M. Pilar, Patricia Pérez-Matute, Pedro González-Muniesa, Pedro L. Prieto-Hontoria, María J. Moreno-Aliaga, and J. Alfredo Martínez. 2012. Lipoic acid administration prevents nonalcoholic steatosis linked to long-term high-fat feeding by modulating mitochondrial function. *The Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry* 23 (12): 1676–84. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnutbio.2011.11.011>.
[. C. Verster_2008]: Verster, J. C. 2008. The alcohol hangover-a puzzling phenomenon. *Alcohol and Alcoholism* 43 (2): 124–26. <https://doi.org/10.1093/alcalc/agm163>.
[. Verster_Stephens_Penning_van Nuland_Fliervoet_Olivier_Rohsenow_et al._2010]: Verster, Joris C., Richard Stephens, Renske Penning, Merel van Nuland, Lies AL Fliervoet, Berend Olivier, Damaris J. Rohsenow, et al. 2010. Current Drug Abuse Reviews: The Alcohol Hangover. *Alcohol* 131. <https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Neil_Mcgregor/publication/45658907_The_Alcohol_Hangover_Research_Group_consensus_statement_on_best_practice_in_alcohol_hangover_research/links/02bfe50feec8776c22000000.pdf>.
[]: Vidali, Matteo, Stephen F. Stewart, and Emanuele Albano. 2008. Interplay between oxidative stress and immunity in the progression of alcohol-mediated liver injury. *Trends in Molecular Medicine* 14 (2): 63–71. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2007.12.005>.
[._2006]: Volkow, Nora D., Gene-Jack Wang, Dinko Franceschi, Joanna S. Fowler, Panayotis (Peter) K. Thanos, Laurence Maynard, S. John Gatley, et al. 2006. Low doses of alcohol substantially decrease glucose metabolism in the human brain. *NeuroImage* 29 (1): 295–301. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.07.004>.
[]: Walcher, Brooke N., and Robert R. Miller. 2008. Ethanol-induced increased endogenous homocysteine levels and decreased ratios of SAM/SAH are only partially attenuated by exogenous glycine in developing chick brains. *Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part C: Toxicology & Pharmacology* 147 (1): 11–16. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpc.2007.03.006>.
[öfel_2016]: Wall, Tamara L., Susan E. Luczak, and Susanne Hiller-Sturmhöfel. 2016. Biology, Genetics, and Environment. *Alcohol Research : Current Reviews* 38 (1): 59–68. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4872614/>.
[]: Wang, Che-Chuan, Chung-Ching Chio, Ching-Hong Chang, Jinn-Rung Kuo, and Ching-Ping Chang. 2010. Beneficial effect of agmatine on brain apoptosis, astrogliosis, and edema after rat transient cerebral ischemia. *BMC Pharmacology* 10 (1): 11. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2210-10-11>.
[]: Wang, Fang, Ya Li, Yu-Jie Zhang, Yue Zhou, Sha Li, and Hua-Bin Li. 2016. Natural Products for the Prevention and Treatment of Hangover and Alcohol Use Disorder. *Molecules* 21 (1): 64. <https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules21010064>.
[]: Wang, Fang, Yu-Jie Zhang, Yue Zhou, Ya Li, Tong Zhou, Jie Zheng, Jiao-Jiao Zhang, Sha Li, Dong-Ping Xu, and Hua-Bin Li. 2016. Effects of Beverages on Alcohol Metabolism: Potential Health Benefits and Harmful Impacts. *International Journal of Molecular Sciences* 17 (3): 354. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms17030354>.
[]: Wang, Xin-Pei, Fan Lei, Feng Du, Yu-Shuang Chai, Jing-Fei Jiang, Yu-Gang Wang, Xuan Yu, Xiao-Jin Yan, Dong-Ming Xing, and Li-Jun Du. 2015. Protection of Gastrointestinal Mucosa from Acute Heavy Alcohol Consumption: The Effect of Berberine and Its Correlation with TLR2, 4/IL1β-TNFα Signaling. *PLOS ONE* 10 (7): e0134044. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0134044>.
[]: Watari, Ikue, Shiro Oka, Shinji Tanaka, Taiki Aoyama, Hiroki Imagawa, Takayoshi Shishido, Shigeto Yoshida, and Kazuaki Chayama. 2013. Effectiveness of polaprezinc for low-dose aspirin-induced small-bowel mucosal injuries as evaluated by capsule endoscopy: a pilot randomized controlled study. *BMC Gastroenterology* 13: 108. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-230X-13-108>.
[]: Wessner, B, E. -M Strasser, A Spittler, and E Roth. 2003. Effect of single and combined supply of glutamine, glycine, N-acetylcysteine, and R,S-α-lipoic acid on glutathione content of myelomonocytic cells. *Clinical Nutrition* 22 (6): 515–22. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0261-5614(03)00053-0>.
[]: Wiese, Jeffrey G. 2000. The Alcohol Hangover. *Annals of Internal Medicine* 132 (11): 897. <https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-132-11-200006060-00008>.
[]: Wilkinson, Daniel J., Nicholas J. Smeeton, and Peter W. Watt. 2010. Ammonia metabolism, the brain and fatigue; revisiting the link. *Progress in Neurobiology* 91 (3): 200–219. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.01.012>.
[]: Woo, Young-Sup, Su-Jung Yoon, Hae-Kook Lee, Chang-Uk Lee, Jeong-Ho Chae, Chung Lee, and Dai-Jin Kim. 2005. Concentration changes of methanol in blood samples during an experimentally induced alcohol hangover state. *Addiction Biology* 10 (4): 351–55. <https://doi.org/10.1080/13556210500352543>.
[ürtz_Cook_Wang_Tiainen_Tynkkynen_Kangas_Soininen_et al._2016]: Würtz, Peter, Sarah Cook, Qin Wang, Mika Tiainen, Tuulia Tynkkynen, Antti J Kangas, Pasi Soininen, et al. 2016. Metabolic profiling of alcohol consumption in 9778 young adults. *International Journal of Epidemiology* 45 (5): 1493–1506. <https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyw175>.
[]: Xiang, Guangda, Jinhui Pu, Ling Yue, Jie Hou, and Huiling Sun. 2011. α-Lipoic acid can improve endothelial dysfunction in subjects with impaired fasting glucose. *Metabolism - Clinical and Experimental* 60 (4): 480–85. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2010.04.011>.
[]: Yamashina, Shunhei, Nobuhiro Sato, Kazuyoshi Kon, Kenichi Ikejima, and Sumio Watanabe. 2009. Role of mitochondria in liver pathophysiology. *Drug Discovery Today: Disease Mechanisms*, Mitochondrial MechanismsEndocrine Metabolism, 6 (1): e25–30. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ddmec.2010.05.003>.
[]: Yang, Hui-Ting, Yi-Wen Chien, Jen-Horng Tsen, Ching-Chien Chang, Jer-Hwa Chang, and Shih-Yi Huang. 2009. Taurine supplementation improves the utilization of sulfur-containing amino acids in rats continually administrated alcohol. *The Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry* 20 (2): 132–39. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnutbio.2008.01.009>.
[]: Yu, Xiao, Yanyan Xu, Shanshan Zhang, Jian Sun, Peiyi Liu, Lin Xiao, Yuhan Tang, Liegang Liu, and Ping Yao. 2016. Quercetin Attenuates Chronic Ethanol-Induced Hepatic Mitochondrial Damage through Enhanced Mitophagy. *Nutrients* 8 (1). <https://doi.org/10.3390/nu8010027>.
[]: Zahr, Natalie M., and Adolf Pfefferbaum. 2017. Alcohol’s Effects on the Brain: Neuroimaging Results in Humans and Animal Models. *Alcohol Research : Current Reviews* 38 (2): 183–206. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5513685/>.
[]: Zahr, Natalie M, Torsten Rohlfing, Dirk Mayer, Richard Luong, Edith V Sullivan, and Adolf Pfefferbaum. 2016. Transient CNS responses to repeated binge ethanol treatment. *Addiction Biology* 21 (6): 1199–1216. <https://doi.org/10.1111/adb.12290>.
[]: Zarifkar, Asadollah, Samira Choopani, Rasoul Ghasemi, Nasser Naghdi, Amir Hossein Maghsoudi, Nader Maghsoudi, Karim Rastegar, and Maryam Moosavi. 2010. Agmatine prevents LPS-induced spatial memory impairment and hippocampal apoptosis. *European Journal of Pharmacology* 634 (1–3): 84–88. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.02.029>.
[?nkov?_Makoveichuk_Vlas?kov?_Olivecrona_Kov??_2015]: Zem?nkov?, Kate?ina, Elena Makoveichuk, Zuzana Vlas?kov?, Gunilla Olivecrona, and Jan Kov?? 2015. Acute alcohol consumption downregulates lipoprotein lipase activity in vivo. *Metabolism* 64 (11): 1592–96. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2015.08.016>.
[]: Zhang, Yu-Jie, Fang Wang, Yue Zhou, Ya Li, Tong Zhou, Jie Zheng, Jiao-Jiao Zhang, Sha Li, Dong-Ping Xu, and Hua-Bin Li. 2016. Effects of 20 Selected Fruits on Ethanol Metabolism: Potential Health Benefits and Harmful Impacts. *International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health* 13 (4): 399. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13040399>.
[]: Zhang, Zhaofeng, Ming Zhao, Qiong Li, Haifeng Zhao, Junbo Wang, and Yong Li. 2009. Acetyl-l-carnitine inhibits TNF-α-induced insulin resistance via AMPK pathway in rat skeletal muscle cells. *FEBS Letters* 583 (2): 470–74. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2008.12.053>.
[]: Zhou, Zhanxiang, Lipeng Wang, Zhenyuan Song, Jack T. Saari, Craig J. McClain, and Y. James Kang. 2005. Zinc Supplementation Prevents Alcoholic Liver Injury in Mice through Attenuation of Oxidative Stress. *The American Journal of Pathology* 166 (6): 1681–90. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1602418/>.
[]: Zhu, Qianlong, Mary Ann Emanuele, Nancy LaPaglia, Elizabeth J. Kovacs, and Nicholas V. Emanuele. 2007. Vitamin E prevents ethanol-induced inflammatory, hormonal, and cytotoxic changes in reproductive tissues. *Endocrine* 32 (1): 59–68. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-007-9010-5>.
