---
layout: post
title:  "Ontology"
date:   2017-02-04
category: active
tags: philosophy
---

<!--more-->

From [Ontology Development 101](http://protege.stanford.edu/publications/ontology_development/ontology101-noy-mcguinness.html).

1. What is the domain that the ontology will cover?
  - All domains of tacit knowledge collected via academic reference reading.
2. For what are we going to use the ontology?
  - To represent my acquired knowledge in a visual format which functions as a perfect memory exocortex.
3. For what types of questions the information in the ontology should provide answers?
  - Queries of possible connections or tracing of "lines of evidence" so as to facilitate research and development.
4. Who will use and maintain the ontology?
  - Myself


# From a single instance to a class

Every elemental statement of information that one wishes to incorporate into the ontology database is actually composed of many implicit statements and qualifiers or context in addition to the intended explicit relationship. Many of these refinements are not explicitly known. The concrete informative statements are necessarily a fraction of the whole. Each successive statement is further refinement on the universe of information the author wishes to convey. Taken together, the statements, refinements, caveats, and implicit knowledge of the author(s) is neatly packed into eternal, immortal communications.

We are therefore presented with a problem: how do we capture the implicit information contained in the explicit statement? I wish I had a good answer to this question.

The process of incorporating new information is really a process of manipulation. Predictions from the brain are combined with manipulations of the stimuli to form an amalgam of stable memories.
